= Business and the world economy =

== Wed Sep 12 10:35:45 BST 2018 ==

== Key Characteristics of the modern Economy ==
1. Restless technological and social change. Result of capitalisms inherent dynamism.
2. Economic volatility. Capitalist dynamism is ‘manic’.
3. Deepening connections (‘globalisation’). The capitalist process is geographically promiscuous.
4. Unevenness. The world is not flat. It is unequal with chronic imbalances.
5. Insecurity. Disruption of lives due to capitalisms ‘creative destruction’. Causing political ‘blowback’.
6. Politics and Nation States were, and are still, important. Geopolitics persists....power matters.

---------------
*Rise of the state*

*Dynamism*, Technological and social change raises the overall state. E.g. Innovation can make processes more efficient.
Table 3.9 illustrates total government expenditrure as per cent of GDP, showing the rise of state.
The technological dynamism is fueled by capitalism. Competition doesnt always need to create efficiency (e.g. having to advertise wont make the product better) Whenthe iPhone came out, it changed everything in the phone industry and made nokia obsolete. Also the advancement in technological progress fuels the overall dynamism of technology.

*Globalisation*, as great as it is is already old today. The interconnectiveness also causes many problems. 
Capitalism is naturally a wonderer, spreading. Thus, globalisation is elementary to globalism. This becomes clearer, when considering the interconnectiveness of capitalism and globalism. Even with new growth centers like China, there is constant concentration. e.g. African countries are unlike china and do things differently, the concentration of success is on e.g. India. 
One place can be emerging really quickly and well while the next place stays in poverty. The gaps get bigger between the extremes.
London for example has been getting more crowded every day. One street dead like a desert, the next street like a pisshole. 

All the capitalism, economic volatility is great as a thing (making people rich etc.), but rather creates *Insecurity* (maybe working for uber in the future? - no ideas about stability of the future). There are great problems with stability in capitalism. 
Life isnt better with capitalism - Jobs satisfaction, status, quality of work isnt better nowadays for middle class people compared to e.g. ten years ago. 

The big mighty Market of the world is freightening, nations and their states are the only force to withstand the power of the market. (Markets have swept away people lifes and made them insecure)

*Geopolitics* and the implications for the global market inherets serious problems threatening capitalism and globalisation. A big reason for geopolitics is the want for sovereigncy. 

*Globalisation*
Many texts just focus on ‘globalisation’ as the only or the main feature/trend – that’s too narrow. ‘Globalisation’ is no longer the ‘latest hot issue’

*Blowback*
Recent political trends (Trump, Brexit. The ‘rise of populism’, ‘the return of geopolitics) is a backlash against several of my ‘key features’: Globalisation,Inequality,Volatility, Insecurity
It also proves globalisation is not irreversible; and politics still matters
1990’s rhetoric of a new liberal world order with all nations converging on American style capitalism and unified governance...is dead now. Geopolitical division and power plays, competition and alternative models of capitalism are the ‘news’ now.
A more contemporaneous summary of the present conjuncture  is not globalisation but a ‘crisis of liberal globalism’ 


== Mon Sep 17 10:37:23 BST 2018 ==

*A brief history of the mordern world economy*

Most significant events in the modern world economy have occurred before our birth.
Thus implying: _Things could get worse._

*Overview of historical phases:*

  * 1850 - 1914 - Industrialisation
  * 1914 - 45 - Crisis and ware
  * 1945 - 70 - A _golden age_
  * 1970's - return of crisis
  * 1980's and 90's - Neolibaralism and _Globalisation_
  * C21st - Crises of liberal globalism


[[Phase 1: Becoming modern]]

[[Phase 2: Industry]]

[[Phase 3: Disaster - war and depression]]

[[Responses – from economic crisis to war]]

[[Phase 4: A golden age and cold war]]

Gold standard - You guarantee the conversion from your currency into gold. E.g. 35$ = 1 ounce of gold. If your gold supply decreases, it decreases the money supply. The gold standard can be abolished for further liquidity. 

Dani Rodrik - Globalisation - The trade-offs https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LRDIejhdtYk

*Hyper-Globalisation* 

What's good for hyper-globalisation? - For ordinary people the effects are worse. All people are used to the belief that the government will look after them, which is not the case anymore.
_We need the right kind of globalisation._

The search for low cost labour has put pressure on labour wages.


== Wed Sep 19 10:33:23 BST 2018 ==

  * End of colonies, newly independent states begin industrialization under state leadership
  * Slow recovery of (trans-national) integration...
  * But also...managed capitalism...governments tried to provide..
    * Welfare
    * Macroeconomic policy
    * Selective protectionism and capital controls
    * Aiming at full employment and growth
  * Multilateral institutions (IMF, WB, GATT, UN) and...
  * (In West) American leadership (supported by cold war)
    * Dollar as reserve currency
    * Marshall aid and promotion of European integration
 
 
== Mon Sep 24 11:29:33 BST 2018 ==

[[National Variety and Strategies]]
 
*NATIONAL VARIETY AND STRATEGIES*

- Some broad distinctions between society cultures, law and political regime of different nations.
- Models of the variety of national political-economy and state strategies towards (including the famous ‘Varieites of Capitalism’ debate on distinction between coordinated [social-] market and liberal market economy, Litan et al’s on the ‘four kinds of capitalism’, Palan et al on various ‘state Strategies’, theory of the ‘Developmental State’ model of East Asia and ‘Authoritarian’ capitalism[ Russia, China and others])
- Debate about vices and virtues of the various models or national capitalism (are liberal markets more innovatory, are social markets more cohesive and quality-oriented, is mercantilist develomentalism necessary for catch-up but not good for innovation?
- Do the varieties of capitalism compete or clash with each other in a globalized world?    

---------------------------------------

Dicken, P. (2010). Global shift: mapping the changing contours of the world economy (6th ed.) London: Sage Publications. Chapter 6 (pp 170-187Preview the document).

https://mycourses.hult.edu/courses/2397302/files/133197691/download

Deals with: the continued importance of states and nations, cultural differences, dimensions of national/policy difference, different models of developed country capitalism)

The state remains important in chaping capitalism - how it works in different nations.

---------------------------------------

Gilpin, R. (2011). Global Political Economy. Princeton University Press. Chapter 7 ‘National Systems of Political Economy’ pp1 174-195Preview the document 

https://mycourses.hult.edu/courses/2397302/files/133197844/download?wrap=1

Dealing with following questions: What is the significance of different systems of capitalism, are some better?
Do the systems compete, and do nations compete?
Is there convergence of the models—perhaps because of globalisation or the superiority of one?


1. What is the significance of national differences?
2. Is one form of capitalisn superior?
3. Do nations and forms of capitalism compete?
4. Is there a convergence?
5. How do they relate? Harmony and mutual recognition?
 
_The state is not dead_

== Wed Sep 26 11:45:39 BST 2018 ==

*Varieties of culture and policy*

Cultures vary as business school teach. See Dicken for models of cultural difference. E.g. "East Asian values" as key to success. Hofstede or Schwartz.

_Beware cultural reductionism_

Questioning cultural reductionism

Of course differences exist, but cultures are not monoliths, they are internally varied.
Cultures are not fundamental or self-sufficient, they change. Sociologists call it "consrtructed".

Culture being used by elites 

- Saudi tradition
- Japaneseness
- The american way

*Varieties of capitalism*

National variety part 2, from culture and policy to political economy and institutions.

- Coordinated market economy
- liberal Market economy (developed by hall and saskice and accepted by many business schools.)

Dickens list:

- Neoliberal
- Social market capitlaism
- Development capitalism
- Authoritarian capitalism
 
Professors remark: (Liberal versus social market capitalism)

- Hall and saskice (coordinated and liberal market economies)
- Dicken Neoliberal and social market
- Litan and scramm - Big Firm capitalism and entrepreneurial capitalsim
- Gilpin - German and japanese (stakeholder) Vs. American (free enterprise) capitalism.
 
Distincive features of these two varities of capitalism:

Liberal market econmies Vs  Coordinated Market economies

Liberal Market Economies:

- Primacy of private entreprise and market freedom
- individualism is primacy
- Shareholder value and finance semi detached
- Rights and powers of capital start-ups/entry and exit/sacking

Coordinated Market Economies:

- Social cohesion - high welfare and tax
- Society and social responsiblity
- Stakeholder (labour and governmnent management) decisions -social partnership
- More stress on worker rights and long-term commitment to specialsied skill.
 
Good Capitalism and Bad Capitalism:

- Big firm capitalism
- Oligarchic capitalism
- Entrepreneurial Capitalism
- State Directed
 
On competitiveness: Hall and Saskice and also Litan and Schram agree, that Liberal/Entrepreneurial /Neoliberal capitslaism is better at blue sky innovation.
Coordinated/Social/Big Firm capitalism is better at incremental improvement and refinement/investment in quality and standards and specialist skills in established activity.
 
Blue sky innovation - innovation but completely new instead of incremental improvement. 

*Good and Bad capitalism - Intellectual facts - the rise of Authoritarian or state capitalism?*

_Do nations and models compete?_

Krugman says Nations don’t compete—politicians are deluded and dangerous to think they do Even if they compete to improve general productivity this serves others, as does trade....there is no zero sum game.
But others say nations do compete to attract capital investment and capture value from leading tech
Porter shows how firms’ competitiveness derives from the national business environment
A suggestion: Models seem to need different international environments—rules of interaction, regimes of policy strategy and coordination. So perhaps states clash over the global regime?
More on these last two questions at the end of Week 4 and 5 after we look more closely at real examples and variety

[[In class activity]]



