*NATIONAL VARIETY AND STRATEGIES*

- Some broad distinctions between society cultures, law and political regime of different nations.
- Models of the variety of national political-economy and state strategies towards (including the famous ‘Varieites of Capitalism’ debate on distinction between coordinated [social-] market and liberal market economy, Litan et al’s on the ‘four kinds of capitalism’, Palan et al on various ‘state Strategies’, theory of the ‘Developmental State’ model of East Asia and ‘Authoritarian’ capitalism[ Russia, China and others])
- Debate about vices and virtues of the various models or national capitalism (are liberal markets more innovatory, are social markets more cohesive and quality-oriented, is mercantilist develomentalism necessary for catch-up but not good for innovation?
- Do the varieties of capitalism compete or clash with each other in a globalized world?    

---------------------------------------

Dicken, P. (2010). Global shift: mapping the changing contours of the world economy (6th ed.) London: Sage Publications. Chapter 6 (pp 170-187Preview the document).

https://mycourses.hult.edu/courses/2397302/files/133197691/download

Deals with: the continued importance of states and nations, cultural differences, dimensions of national/policy difference, different models of developed country capitalism)

The state remains important in chaping capitalism - how it works in different nations.

---------------------------------------

Gilpin, R. (2011). Global Political Economy. Princeton University Press. Chapter 7 ‘National Systems of Political Economy’ pp1 174-195Preview the document 

https://mycourses.hult.edu/courses/2397302/files/133197844/download?wrap=1

Dealing with following questions: What is the significance of different systems of capitalism, are some better?
Do the systems compete, and do nations compete?
Is there convergence of the models—perhaps because of globalisation or the superiority of one?


1. What is the significance of national differences?
2. Is one form of capitalisn superior?
3. Do nations and forms of capitalism compete?
4. Is there a convergence?
5. How do they relate? Harmony and mutual recognition?
 
_The state is not dead_

*Varieties of culture and policy*

Cultures vary as business school teach. See Dicken for models of cultural difference. E.g. "East Asian values" as key to success. Hofstede or Schwartz.

_Beware cultural reductionism_

Questioning cultural reductionism

Of course differences exist, but cultures are not monoliths, they are internally varied.
Cultures are not fundamental or self-sufficient, they change. Sociologists call it "consrtructed".

Culture being used by elites 

- Saudi tradition
- Japaneseness
- The american way

*Varieties of capitalism*

National variety part 2, from culture and policy to political economy and institutions.

- Coordinated market economy
- liberal Market economy (developed by hall and saskice and accepted by many business schools.)

Dickens list:

- Neoliberal
- Social market capitlaism
- Development capitalism
- Authoritarian capitalism
 
Professors remark: (Liberal versus social market capitalism)

- Hall and saskice (coordinated and liberal market economies)
- Dicken Neoliberal and social market
- Litan and scramm - Big Firm capitalism and entrepreneurial capitalsim
- Gilpin - German and japanese (stakeholder) Vs. American (free enterprise) capitalism.
 
Distincive features of these two varities of capitalism:

Liberal market econmies Vs  Coordinated Market economies

Liberal Market Economies:

- Primacy of private entreprise and market freedom
- individualism is primacy
- Shareholder value and finance semi detached
- Rights and powers of capital start-ups/entry and exit/sacking

Coordinated Market Economies:

- Social cohesion - high welfare and tax
- Society and social responsiblity
- Stakeholder (labour and governmnent management) decisions -social partnership
- More stress on worker rights and long-term commitment to specialsied skill.
 
Good Capitalism and Bad Capitalism:

- Big firm capitalism
- Oligarchic capitalism
- Entrepreneurial Capitalism
- State Directed
 
On competitiveness: Hall and Saskice and also Litan and Schram agree, that Liberal/Entrepreneurial /Neoliberal capitslaism is better at blue sky innovation.
Coordinated/Social/Big Firm capitalism is better at incremental improvement and refinement/investment in quality and standards and specialist skills in established activity.
 
Blue sky innovation - innovation but completely new instead of incremental improvement. 

*Good and Bad capitalism - Intellectual facts - the rise of Authoritarian or state capitalism?*

_Do nations and models compete?_

Krugman says Nations don’t compete—politicians are deluded and dangerous to think they do Even if they compete to improve general productivity this serves others, as does trade....there is no zero sum game.
But others say nations do compete to attract capital investment and capture value from leading tech
Porter shows how firms’ competitiveness derives from the national business environment
A suggestion: Models seem to need different international environments—rules of interaction, regimes of policy strategy and coordination. So perhaps states clash over the global regime?
More on these last two questions at the end of Week 4 and 5 after we look more closely at real examples and variety

[[In class activity]]



