---
layout: post
title: "Accidents Happen"
date: 2019-03-24
authors: Ty Yiu
---

## Part 1. Selecting the Best
Betsy Wheeler had been a supervisor in the Data Production Center of American
Security, Inc. for two years. She was responsible for six data entry clerks who
worked the 4:00 p.m. to midnight shift. Four of the clerks worked full-time in a
keypunching capacity and two of the clerks combined some key- punching with
clerical and administrative chores.  The Data Production Center was responsible
for keypunching data taken daily at the 65 office locations spread across the
state. It was a production job with high and demanding standards (150 items per
hour). Betsy had worked three years as a data entry clerk before assuming her
current job. She knew that after a reasonable training period, these standards
could be met by most anyone. Betsy had done well as a data entry clerk and was
doing well as a supervisor. She liked supervising others, especially dealing
with the multitude of "people problems" that came her way during each shift.
Nonetheless, she was not prepared for the latest problem that had developed.
There seemed to be no solutions for it, and it was starting to wear her out.
Betsy's problem was centered on Bob Jenkins, a recently hired data entry clerk,
although Betsy was not sure whether the problem was caused by Bob or by her
boss, Sharon Leigh. Betsy reviewed the situation, going back two months to the
very beginning.  At that time, one of Betsy's data entry clerks had quit, and
she had sent a hiring order to Personnel. Three days later, one of the
interviewers in Personnel called to say that they had found "a good applicant"
by the name of Bob Jenkins. The interviewer explained that Bob was disabled
(confined to a wheelchair) and had been referred by the State Rehabilitation
Department.  The interviewer told Betsy: "He has been extensively trained by the
State in keypunching. I think you'll like him." The next day, Betsy went to
Personnel about 20 minutes before her shift started in order to interview Bob
Jenkins. Rather than ask a lot of questions, she listened to Bob talk about
himself. He said he was finishing his associateâ€™s degree in finance at the local
community college and that this night shift job would allow him to go to school
while he worked. He also mentioned that he had had a colostomy (removal of a
portion of the bowel, which required him to wear a collection bag for his waste
matter). Betsy asked if Bob would have transportation problems getting to work
and he assured her there would be no problem.  Betsy liked Bob. She was also in
a rush to start her shift and decided to end the interview on that note.
Although Bob was the only applicant she interviewed, she decided to rely on her
intuition and offered Bob the job. He accepted and began working the following
week.

1. Given Bob's disability, what kinds of questions should Betsy have asked
   during the interview? What legal considerations exist?

**Answer**
: It is essential to emphasize nondiscriminatory practices. It is often time
consuming and can entail potential legal issues. Much information that could be
interpreted as irrelevant and conclusion misleading, but may be brought up by
the candidate, thus a racial or religious statement could end up entailing
potential legal issues, given that the interviewer was aware, even if not
intended. Due to Bob being disabled there are many potential situations for
which legal issues may arise, thus her interview should have been much more
structured. The unstructured interview leaves room for possible issues. Her
questions should have been revolving around whether or not he is capable of
doing the job.

2. Evaluate how well Betsy interviewed Bob and completed the selection process.

**Answer*

3. What kind of selection procedure should Betsy have used in order to identify
   the best candidates for her data entry position? Design a complete selection
   process.

## Part 2. Learning the Ropes?
As supervisor of six data entry clerks on the night shift at the Data production
Center, Betsy was eager to find good quality employees. She thought she had
found one in Bob Jenkins, a wheelchair-bound student. After a brief interview,
she hired him, and he began working a week later.  On Bob's first night on the
job, Betsy wondered whether she made a mistake in hiring him. After showing Bob
around the area and introducing him to co-workers, she took Bob to his keypunch
station and briefed him on the work. She gave Bob her usual orientation speech
and then left him alone to start work. By mid-shift, it was clear to Betsy that
Bob was not doing well. He was laboring at the job and was very far behind in
the work, even for someone's first day.  She came over to Bob's station. "How's
it going, Bob?" she asked. She was clearly worried.  Bob sensed concern in her
voice. "Oh, I'm coming along," he said. "It will just take me a little time to
get used to this machine." He waited a moment as Betsy looked over his shoulder
at the pile of work still needing to be done. "You see, although I received two
weeks of keypunch training with the state, this is my first job as a
keypuncher." Betsy's expression registered the surprise and worry she felt
inside. Bob realized he may have said the wrong thing. He added hurriedly,
"Look, don't worry, I'll get the hang of it real soon." Betsy did not look very
relieved. Bob looked at her rather desperately: "I really need this job. I
promise that with some time and practice, I will be the best keypuncher you've
ever had." Betsy still liked Bob and admired his courage and conviction. She was
sympathetic to his plight. But, she also realized that she did not have much
time to spare in training him. Her unit had a demanding production schedule, and
she needed to have a fully capable production team as soon as possible. Although
there was some leeway in the schedule due to varying weekly and monthly loads,
her flexibility was limited.

4. Does Betsy have a problem here?
5. Evaluate her coaching and orientation of Bob

## Part 3. An Explosive Problem
Betsy decided to cross-train Bob for some of the clerical and administrative
duties her unit had to perform. In this way, he could still do limited
keypunching while also getting other important work done. For three weeks, this
strategy worked well. Betsy was very impressed with Bob's general work habits.
He worked very hard and on many occasions even refused to take breaks. Betsy
told one of the other supervisors: "If it weren't for his handicap, he'd be an
ideal employee." Then came the night of the accident. As Betsy later told a
friend, "Wouldn't you know it would happen on the night I was off?" The problem
was this: Bob's colostomy bag ruptured. There was nothing special leading up to
the event. Bob was doing his work as usual. At one point, he reached across his
desk for some papers, wedging the bag at a bad angle, and it just ruptured.  He
tried to be calm and matter-of-fact about it as he headed to the restroom. At
one point, a co-worker visiting the restroom saw Bob.  "I've had a slight
problem," Bob stated. "I'll be in here for a while." Bob spent about an hour in
the restroom, trying to clean up. When he came out, his co-workers could see
that he was upset and that, despite his efforts, Bob had not been able to clean
his soiled clothing or the evidence of the accident in the restroom. To make the
situation even more difficult, there was a pronounced odor hanging in the air.
Bob was embarrassed and so were his co-workers. They tried to ignore the
situation until the end of the shift.  When the day shift arrived the next
morning, the restroom was still unpleasantly soiled and smelly. The manager of
the day shift received many complaints, and he had to arrange for a cleaning
crew from building maintenance to clean up the restroom.  The day shift manager
called Sharon Leigh, the night shift manager (and Betsy's boss) at home and woke
her up. He was belligerent and caustic as he complained about "the mess that
cripple left." Sharon was angered by the phone call and was still angry when she
came to work that evening. Sharon immediately called Betsy to her office and
angrily complained to her about what had happened. She concluded the ten-minute
lecture by announcing to Betsy that "if that kind of accident happens again,
I'll fire him." Betsy left Sharon's office, shaken and unsure what to do.

6. What should Betsy do now:
- With Bob?
- With the other co-workers in the unit?
- With her boss Sharon Leigh?
7. Is there any legal problem if Bob is terminated because he had ruptured
another bag?
