# Case Studies -Recruitment

## HRM Incident 1: A Problem Ad? 

Dorothy Bryant was the new recruiting supervisor for International Manufacturing
Company in Salt Lake City, Utah. One of Dorothy’s first assignments was to
recruit two software design engineers for International. Design engineers are
hard to recruit because of the difficulty of their training and the high demand
for them. After considering various recruitment alternatives, Dorothy placed the
following ad in a local newspaper with a circulation in excess of 1,000,000:

```

    EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITYFOR SOFTWARE DESIGN ENGINEERS

2 positions available for engineers desiring career in growth industry.Prefer
recent college graduates with good appearance.Good credit ratingApply Today!
Send your résumé,inconfidence, to: D. A. BryantInternational Manufacturing Co.,
P.O. Box 1515Salt Lake City, UT  84115    

```

More than 300 applications arrived in the first week, and Dorothy was elated.
When she reviewed the applicants, however, it appeared that few people possessed
the desired qualifications for the job.


### QUESTIONS

1. Dorothy overlooked some of the proper recruiting practices, which resulted in
   an excessive number of unqualified people applying. What are they?

2. Identify the hiring standards that should be avoided in the ad.   

3. What recruitment sources and methods might have been used to have generated a
   better applicant pool for the two software design engineer positionsfor
   International Manufacturing? Defend your recommendations.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Dorothy did not specify what skills are needed and what knowledge should be
   possessed by the applicants, thus the job specifications were missing and
   applicant could not identify whether they are suitable for the job or not.
   She also didn't specify the industry in which the job lies. 

2. Wanting applicants to be *in a good appearance*, is a bad hiring standard, as
   it is being subjective and not relevant for the job. Prefering college
   students may count toward a specification that is needed, though wanting
   *recent college graduates* discriminates against age, or so it seems.
   describing the job as fulfilling growth in the industry is a promise that may
   not hold up, thus it should have been avoided.

3. If the company prefers recent college graduates, they could go directly to
   universities for them to recruit from. As young people utilise internet
   recruitment, that could be a valid recruitment method, given recent college
   graduates are young. It does not say anything about working environments, pay
   or similar.

## HRM Incident 2: I Am Qualified, Why Not Me? 

Five years ago when Bobby Bret joined Crystal Productions as a junior
accountant, he felt that he was on his way up. He had just graduated with a B+
average from college, where he was well liked by his peers and by the faculty
and had been an officer in several student organizations. Bobby had shown a
natural ability to get along with people as well as to get things done. He
remembered what Roger Friedman, the controller at Crystal, had told him when he
was hired: “I think you will do well here, Bobby. You’ve come highly
recommended. You are the kind of guy that can expect to move right on up the
ladder.”Bobby felt that he had done a good job at Crystal, and everybody seemed
to like him. In addition, his performance appraisals had been excellent.
However, after five years he was still a junior accountant. He had applied for
two senior accountant positions that had opened, but they were both filled by
people hired from outside the firm. When the accounting supervisor’s job came
open two years ago, Bobby had not applied. He was surprised when his new boss
turned out to be a hotshot graduate of State University whose only experience
was three years with a large accounting firm. Bobby had hoped that Ron Greene, a
senior accountant he particularly respected, would get the job.On the fifth
anniversary of his employment at Crystal, Bobby decided it was time to do
something. He made an appointment with the controller. At that meeting Bobby
explained to Mr. Friedman that he had worked hard to obtain a promotion and
shared his frustration about having been in the same job for so long. “Well,”
said Mr. Friedman, “you don’t think that you were all that much better qualified
than the people that we have hired, do you?” “No,” said Bobby, “but I think I
could have handled the senior accountant job. Of course, the people you have
hired are doing a great job too.” The controller responded, “We just look at the
qualifications of all the applicants for each job, and considering everything,
try to make a reasonable decision.”

### QUESTIONS

1. Do you believe that Bobby has a legitimate complaint? Explain.
2. Explain the benefits of a promotion from within policy. Would such a policy
   be appropriate for Crystal?

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Yes, everyone in his position would feel that way after five years of
   excellence in the workplace with no significant promotion.

2. Promotions from within encourage good work and creates loyalty with the
   employees. It will retain company talent and develop it, while being less
   costly as recruitmen from outside.



