= Service Sector =
== Wed Sep 12 09:36:40 BST 2018 ==
_What is the 'Service Sector'_
The service sector produces intangible goods, more precisely services instead of goods, and according to the U.S. Census Bureau, it comprises various service industries including warehousing and truck transportation services, information sector services, commodities, securities and other investment services, professional, technical and scientific services, waste management services, health care and social assistance services, and arts, entertainment, and recreation services. Countries with economies centered around the service sector are considered more advanced than industrial or agricultural economies.

The service sector, also known as the tertiary sector, is the third tier in the three sector economy. Instead of the product production, this sector produces services like advice, experience and discussion. Examples of service sector jobs include housekeeping, tours, nursing and teaching. By contrast, individuals employed in the industrial or manufacturing sectors produce tangible goods, such as cars, clothes or equipment.

Among the countries that place heavy emphasis on the service sector, the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia and China rank among the top. In the United States, the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) produces a monthly index that details the general state of business activity in the service sector. This index is regarded as a metric for the overall economic health of the country because approximately two-thirds of U.S. economic activity occurs in the service sector.

According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the CIA World Factbook, the following countries are the largest by service or tertiary output as of 2016: 

United States: $14.76 billion
China: $5.7 billion
Japan: $3.5 billion
Germany: $2.4 billion
United Kingdom: $2.1 billion
France: $1.9 billion
Italy: $1.4 billion
Brazil: $1.3 billion
Canada: $1.1 billion
India: $1.0 billion
