---
layout: post
title: "Power reflection essay"
date: 2018-12-03
authors: Ty_Yiu
---

Reflect on a personal or professional situation when you felt you had power.
Briefly describe the situation. How did it feel to be powerful?  How did it
affect the way you saw the situation and others in it?  How did it affect the
way you acted? Now think of a situation in which you felt powerless and answer
the same questions.  Draw on relevant models or theories when discussing these
situations.

Once upon a late night, 4 am to be precise, the blue-light and screemish sounds
of my mobile-phone would have me be wakeful for the next hours. Most of my
feeling of power origins in the realm of expertise and referent power. My friend
Sacha is a jewish military member of Israel. The recent relations regarding
conflict weren't having me feeling well about him having to join in the first
place. He told me many stories that were entirely bonkers, but this call was on
another level of mad. I heard his voice, whispering into the microphone. Not
anymore sure about the exact wording, his message was along the lines of: "Hey,
how you doing? I'm pinned down and we are soon out of supplies, what should I
do?" - So I stood up to make myself a coffee. The basics of explosives is
something that is always a good party trick, but the resources to his
availability were sparse. The trick was not to have them be engaged in a
shootout, but to guide them to safety. The hatch in the ground, which wouldn't
open ended up to be their best choice. I had them prepare a thermite-reaction to
burn though the metal hatch big enough of a hole for them to fit through. My part
was done, so I made a call to Tokyo, where the most ingenious computer nerd
studies. 1pm local time for him enabled him to bring up the blueprints of the
sewer system and guide them the right way.  This story seems to be more out of a
movie than reality, thus the reason this having been the most memorable and
influential origin of the feeling of power.  For these reasons, there is a
protocol in place and people to call. The reason for such a seemingly paranoid
or mad preparation and behaviour is the inner hate of mine towards being
powerless. Having to accept that there is maybe only 10% of reality upon one has
control, doesn't mean to not expand the region of influence. A situation in
which I felt powerless, reduced it's frequency of showing up over time, but do
occur. A memorable example of such situation, was when my brother went out
partying and didn't tell me where to, didn't answer his phone and was at none of
the places I called. After having spent an hour looking for him myself while
calling people, I felt rather powerless about the situation not having been
resolved already by now. The sudden worry is due to friends informing me about
these guys from another school, that apparently have planned something stupid
for the night involving my brother's friend group. These plans normally end in
fights, wasted homes, mentions in local media, but sometimes a lot worse.
Knowing and having experienced everything first hand, wanting to not have my
brother involved was priority number one, considering he was never as
restrained. That really affected my behaviour, fear and worry overplayed
calmness. That rarely happens. In the end, a friend who was out as well saw him
in the streets and gave me his whereabouts. He was fine, because of having
already been done for the evening, strolling home with few friends. Now, having
laid out these situations, it is time to analyse how circumstances make me
behave and how power is tied to such. My central origin of power as already
mentioned is expertise power supported with referent power. These are the only
forces that I can expand without physically changing position. Coercive and
reward power I perceive more as peripheral, due to the fact that they occur less
conscious, I do not as often intend to use them, but end up doing anyway.
My individual power, split up into relational, positional and personal is as
such similarly in terms of frequency of use and having my favour. As mentioned,
I prefer power originating from oneself, from within over power that is
dependent on one's surroundings. The position in a firm, country, scale of power
all these aspects take a lot more time and change to occur in order to
effectively expand. Knowing and being able to apply knowledge is more efficient,
in every interpretation of the word. The relational power is one to never
underestimate. There are only 24 hours in a day, only so much to focus on before
the law of diminishing return kicks in. Therefore, specialisation is key. My
network as well as some long nights with some few friends enabled us to leverage
our relations to a greater extent, a bigger reach of influence, knowledge and
power. The human brain is not good at multi-tasking, it is also not good at
handling tasks that seem big. Therefore, managing human resources to break these
monumental objectives into smaller pieces, for which each tasks there is a
specialised expert. That is why relational power is so much more important than
positional power. Personal power shouldn't directly be set side by side with
relational power, as personal power, in my method is reason and origin for
relational power. Positional power is a *nice-to-have-add-on*. Individual power
is more than that, is it how one is positioned within a network of influence.
Thus, positional power could also be seen as a sub-class of relational power.
The above analysed how situations of power or powerless, affected my behaviour
and how my relation with power affected others. I also introduced my own concept
of individual power, given the criteria as mentioned.







 
