## Globalisation (ecosystem) 

Geographical disparities between regions of the world are the cause for the urge
of progressing globalisation to reduce physical friction in terms of logistics
and management. Those disparities come in varying forms of existence, such as
the ability to grow certain crop due to local temperatures. 

The interconnectedness of today's world is reliant on dynamic processes and is
disrupting the natural global ecosystem. Said disruptions are known to be
leading to disastrous consequences such as climate change, and often come in the
form of either exploitation of non-renewable resources or the ignorant
inconsiderate behaviour of entities within this interconnected globe, including
aspects like waste and material use. 

The society of the future will have identified the priority of need for radical
change and have acted upon the problem, enabling a sustainable continuation of
globalisation instead. Sustaining such long-term *"filters of life"* (Fermi
paradox) would have humanity to concentrate more efforts towards considerations
of the *long-term*, scalability and sustainability. 

Tying these aspects of considerations for the environment mankind lives in with
the interconnectedness of the *post-globalisation* time, one can observe the
potential that expands, as concepts such as encapsulation, scalability,
sustainability, decentralisation, automation & data-centrism converge.

Future societies will have harnessed the capabilities of *special Artificial
Intelligence* and have connected it to a *Blockchain* information stream and
database, which improves itself using machine learning, to manage the
interconnectedness and leverage the from it originating potential. The mentioned
dynamic processes only exist because of the lack of stability, caused by factors
like The weather, resource availability, supply chain ambiguity or human err.
Such stability can be achieved by implementing technologies from data science
and AI, in order to make holistic and accurate predictions, which can bridge the
gaps of stability in said dynamic. 

> For example, problems that extrapolate when accumulated, meaning getting harder
> to solve the worse it gets, hoard a lot of potential under said considerations.
> Management of intelligent systems for smart cities of the globalized world could
> automate waste-management, resource-distribution (public & commercial),
> *commodity* supply (e.g. food) or disaster/problem response optimisation. 

The globalisation trend opposing though is such another force, the of the wish
for sovereignty, shared by many nations. The most analogical example currently,
could be the *Brexit* situation and their wish regain sovereignty.
Relating to this trend and problems that exist within the public domain of the
government or society as a whole, is the idea that future societies will be
likely to have integrated, is decentralisation of responsibility,
accountability, resources et cetera. 

Peer-to-peer implementation resolves the underlying issue that is causing the
wish for sovereignty, *lack of trust*. This trust-issue is fueled in a society
with loss of identity and mass migration to urban centers. 

> Decentralisation will establish a societal system that renders the need for
> trust irrelevant.

Effectively, lowering the barriers to globalisation and interconnectedness. The
considerations of the environment, decentralisation and having smaller aspects
of automation be AI powered, play hand in hand, given current trends such as
ecology conscious production and the reclamation of quality over quantity as
deciding buying factor. 

Globalisation has caused some issues that are now there to be solved, while
globalisation doesn't seem to be stopping in progression, leaving the problem to
tackle being the origin of the seeming consequences of globalisation, which may only
be extrapolated by globalisation and have a completely different root-cause.

-----------------------

\pagebreak

## References

Centralised and Decentralised Societies Compared. (2017). Medium. Retrieved 20
June 2019, from [here](http://bit.ly/2ZCMx4y)

(2019). Undp.org. Retrieved 20 June 2019, from [here](http://bit.ly/2Zw5Vjm)

AI-powered waste management gets under way in China. (2019). The Telegraph.
Retrieved 20 June 2019, from [here](http://bit.ly/2ZC7GvG)

Artificial Intelligence And Blockchain: 3 Major Benefits Of Combining These Two
Mega-Trends. (2019). Forbes.com. Retrieved 20 June 2019, from
[here](https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/03/02/artificial-intelligence-and-blockchain-3-major-benefits-of-combining-these-two-mega-trends/#583f05814b44)

Powered by Blockchain, AI Potential Realized | Accenture. (2019). Accenture.com.
Retrieved 20 June 2019, from
[here](https://www.accenture.com/gb-en/insights/blockchain/ai-plus-blockchain)

Sovereignty in the age of Globalization - Muhtadi Faiaz’s Blog - Medium. (2017).
Medium. Retrieved 20 June 2019, from
[here](https://medium.com/blog-faiaz/is-state-sovereignty-diminishing-or-transforming-in-the-globalized-world-fd48edfbc949)

Taking back control of globalisation: Sovereignty through European integration.
(2018). Robert-schuman.eu. Retrieved 20 June 2019, from
[here](https://www.robert-schuman.eu/en/european-issues/0468-taking-back-control-of-globalisation-sovereignty-through-european-integration)

Globalization failed too many people. Here’s the technology that could help it
work for everyone. (2017). Quartz. Retrieved 20 June 2019, from
[here](https://qz.com/903401/globalization-failed-too-many-people-heres-the-technology-that-could-help-it-work-for-everyone/)

\pagebreak

## Notes

> The internet & Globalisation caused disintermediation, the elimination of the
> need to physically visit the provider of goods and services, causing in a
> removal of friction within the physical world and how we move physical objects
> around. Decentralisation restores what got lost since.

Globalization failed too many people. Here’s the technology that could help it
work for everyone. (2017). Quartz. Retrieved 20 June 2019, from
[here](https://qz.com/903401/globalization-failed-too-many-people-heres-the-technology-that-could-help-it-work-for-everyone/)
**Use this for Age-disparity in the sense of income disparity/expectations over
generations et cetera**

-----------------------

\pagebreak

## Ageing Population (loss of value, socio, economic, political) 

Future Societies, by definition are unlike today's societies. The trends that
have impact upon the makeup of the societies of the future, are progressed mass
migration and diversity, like urbanisation and globalisation, the fact that
the populous will grow by every generation and the thus resulting greater
variety, as well as concentration of communities and viewpoints regarding
politics, societal discussion points and economic behaviours of this society.
Considering this, an inevitability for such societies is complex diversity and
inclusiveness of individuals and communities. An ageing population has the
consequence of enlarging some communities of a society, meaning that the
increase of representation in different age groups, induces the same effect on
communities that these age groups may identify with. 

Many communities nowadays are not included as much in the three aspects,
political, sociological and economic development as other communities and often
said communities clash. The already mentioned *Brexit* movement is a good
example, as it outlines the disparity between political view of two 
communities, from the British society that are separated by age.
The reason of why these disparities exist so prominently, in a political sense,
is a lack of representation of said communities. The fact, that different
generations share different values and perceptions is less receptive to change
and thus not the reason for these disparities, but a supportive force. Indeed,
the forced accumulation of entities is the root-cause.
Many sub-communities within the *LGTBQ* community or the black community or many
other niche groups are known not to be as included in many processes and in
general in terms of representation compared to many other communities, such
circumstance leads to polarisation, as can be seen in the U.S. and the 2016
presidential candidacy. 

A political system that has as many political parties as represented communities
or viewpoints, has been unlikely in the past, but with modern technologies and
concepts like decentralised governance, a direct and just democracy can be
achieved, as the image of the great Greek philosophers have always envisioned
it. 

> Decentralised democracy for inclusive political policing and decision making,
> considering/including all participating communities.

The value from including niche and presently less equal communities should be
clear, from efficiency, skill, to being able to have great parts of the
population in terms of politics support a party.
The aristocratic approach of having middle men is aimed at to be reduced to
create a more direct democracy, more inclusive and more equal for all varying
participants.
These ideas relate again to block chain and decentralisation, but AI and other
technologies impact future societies as well, such could look like the rise of
autonomous vehicles, making the roads safer by transferring impaired or elderly
drivers into self-driving cars, or a social platform that focuses on groups and
communities proactively and intelligently. Such platform could integrate into
service such as finance, democratic processes to increase inclusiveness and
equality of opportunity. 

Right now, Facebook seems like the company doing exactly mentioned, focussing on
communities and consequentially increasing inclusiveness with tools like
[Libra](http://bit.ly/2Y1d4rT). 

-----------------------------

\pagebreak

## References

Globalization failed too many people. Here’s the technology that could help it
work for everyone. (2017). Quartz. Retrieved 20 June 2019, from
[here]( http://bit.ly/2IWlWbT)

Machine Learning: Living in the Age of AI | A WIRED Film. (2019). YouTube.
Retrieved 21 June 2019, from [here](http://bit.ly/2WXMljb)

Facebook is redesigning its core app around the two parts people actually like
to use. (2019). The Verge. Retrieved 21 June 2019, from [here](http://bit.ly/2Y24SYk)

Facebook announces Libra cryptocurrency: All you need to know – TechCrunch.
(2019). TechCrunch. Retrieved 21 June 2019, from [here](https://tcrn.ch/2Y2Lzy7)
