---
layout: post
title: "Do we need a public sector?"
date: 2019-02-06
Categories: Uni
---

# Glossary

**Pareto Efficiency**
: Pareto optimality is a state of allocation of resources from which it is
impossible to reallocate so as to make any one individual or preference
criterion better off without making at least one individual or preference
criterion worse off.

-------------------


The advocate for minimum state intervention is Adam smith, where as the extent
of intervention can be maximised when considering Karl Marx's views. The
Economic spectrum displays the extremes of *laissez faire* and planned/command
economy and allocates economists like Keynes, Stiglitz, Hayek, Friedman or
Krugman to their opinions on the degree of government intervention.

## Measuring the Size of the public sector

The size can be given as a percentage of the GDP and is commonly used.

## Problems when using public finances

The aspect of *off-budget item* contains all state-owned companies and
participations in private companies held by the state. State owned companies
have their own budgets and accounts, thus we miss that information in our
reports. Maybe a government own that many state owned enterprises, but have so
much regulations/rules that they basically do control other companies. E.g. not
providing medicine themselves, but regulating the market price for their
economy, this way the government has *indirect control*. The *hidden costs of
government* contains all those regulatory activities of the state which do not
directly affect the state expenditures, but which result nevertheless in high
costs for those who have to adapt to the regulations. Over-regulation and
extensive bureaucracy for example lead to hidden costs because growth is
hampered and at the same time private resources are bound inefficiently.

## Do we need a Public Sector?

## Market Efficiency

According to Adam smith, there is a much more persistent characteristic of human
nature than a concern to do good. Therefore, self-interest provides a more
reliable basis for the organisation of the society. *The invisible hand* is a
concept created by Adam smith in 1776. The intuition behind Smith's insight is
that if there is some commodity or service that individuals value but is not
produced, then they will be willing to pay something for it. If the value to a
consumer exceeds the cost of production, there is a potential profit and an
entrepreneur will produce. The entrepreneur makes it unnecessary for the
government to produce the same good.

## Welfare Economics

Focuses on *normative* issues - What should be produced, how, for whom and who
should make these decisions. How can we evaluate different mixes in the mixed
economies around the world? Most economists embrace a criterion called **Pareto
Efficiency**. Resource allocations, when no one can be made better off without
someone being made worse off are said to be *pareto efficient* or *pareto
optimal*. Moving to such an equilibrium, is known as *Pareto improvement*.
Pareto Principle refers to the need of instituting such improvements. The option
of both players hunting a stag is considered *Pareto optimal* because players
cannot switch to any other outcome and make at least one party better off
without making the situation worse for themselves.*Nash's Equilibrium* is an
outcome in which every player is doing the best he possibly can given other
player's choices. So, no player can benefit from unilaterally changing his
choice. The Criterion of **Pareto** is individualistic in two senses, first of
all because it is concerned with each individual's welfare, not with the
relative well-being of different individuals. Secondly, it is each individual's
perception of his/her own welfare that counts. (Consumer sovereignty is
subjective.

## Two fundamental theorems of welfare economics

**1 Theorem**
: Every competitive economy is Pareto Efficient


**2 Theorem**
: Every Pareto efficient resource allocation can be obtained through a
competitive market process with an initial redistribution of wealth.

The second theorem says that the only thing government needs to do is to redistribute initial wealth. In other words, Pareto efficient allocation can be attained by means if a decentralized market mechanism.

## Efficiency in a market

From Micro-economics, in a competitive market the price equals marginal cost.
Market efficiency is reached where $ \text{supply} = \text{demand} $

### Three types of Efficiency

Economists  consider three aspects  of efficiency, all of which are required for
Pareto efficiency.

**Exchange efficiency**
: Whatever goods are produced  have to go to the individuals  who value them
most.

**Production efficiency**
: Given the society’s resources, the production of one good cannot be increased
without decreasing  the production  of another. 

**Product Mix efficiency**
: The goods produced  correspond  to those desired  by individuals.

## Budget Constraint

![Budget Constraint Figure](https://i.ibb.co/k9xkKg1/Budget-Constraint.png)

Given income £100, PO= £2 and PA= £1, an individual can purchase any combination
of apples and oranges along or to the left of the budget constraint. Any
combination to the right is unaffordable. The slope of the budget constraint is
based on the relative price of goods. The budget constraint describes how there
is a trade-off and only 100 can be produced, which can be subdivided into two
kind of goods. *SEE: Production Possibility Frontiers*

## Indifference Curve

![Indifference Curve Figure](https://i.ibb.co/MRgRCFX/Indifference-Curve.png)

An indifference curve (I0, I1, I2,I3, I4) gives the combinations of apples and
oranges among which a consumer is indifferent. The amount of one commodity that
an individual is willing to give up in exchange for a unit of another commodity
is called marginal rate of substitution. As long as different individuals have
different marginal rates of substitution there will be room for a deal.Thus,
exchange efficiency requires that all individuals have the same marginal rate of
substitution.

## Consumer’s choice problem

![Consumer's Choice Problem Figure](https://i.ibb.co/SxTPhV7/Consumer-Choice-Problem.png)

Because all consumers face the same prices in a competitive economy, and each
sets his/her marginal rate of substitution equal to the price ratio, they all
have the same marginal rate of substitution. In the previous slide we showed
that the condition for exchange efficiency was that all individuals have the
same marginal rate of substation. Thus, competitive markets have exchange
efficiency.Consumer chooses the point along the budget constraint that most
prefers; that is the point at which the indifference curve $I_0$ tangent to the
budget constraint (point E). At that point the marginal rate of substitution
equals the relative price of the commodities. 

## Isocost Line

![The Isocost Line](https://i.ibb.co/2NsKM5W/Isocost-line.png)

An isocostline shows the different combinations of inputs that cost a firm the
same amount. The slope of the isocostline is the relative price of the two
production factors. 

## Isoquants

Isoquants trace the different combination of inputs that produce the same
quantities of outputs.The slope of an isoquant is called marginal rate of
technical substitution.Whenever marginal rates of technical substitution differ,
we can switch resources around to increase production. Thus, production
efficiency requires that all firms have the same marginal rate of technical
substitution.

## Isoquants and Isocost Line

![Isoquants and Isocost Lines combined](https://i.ibb.co/wYcNPbY/Isoquant-and-isocost.png)

In a competitive economy all firms face the same prices, so all firms will set
their marginal rate of technical substitution equal to the same price ratio.
Hence, they all have the same marginal rate of technical substitution.In the
previous slide we showed that the condition for production efficiency was that
all firms have the same marginal rate of technical substation. Thus, competitive
markets have production efficiency.A firm maximizes its output, given a
particular level of expenditure on inputs, at the point where the isoquant is
tangent to the isocostline. At that point the marginal rate of technical
substitution equals the relative price of the inputs.

## Production Possibility Schedule

![The Production Possibility Schedule](https://i.ibb.co/3zZnz4c/production-possibility-frontier.png)

For each level of output of one commodity, we can determine from the technology
the maximum feasible level of output of the other commodity. This generates the
Production Possibilities Schedule. The slope of the production possibilities
schedule is called marginal rate of transformation.

## Production Possibilities Schedule and Indifference Curves

Under competition, the marginal rate of transformation will equal the relative
price of the commodities. We have already shown that, under competition,
consumers’ marginal rate of substitution will equal the price ratio.  Because
both the marginal rates of substitution and the marginal rate of transformation
equal price ratio, the marginal rate of transformation must equal the marginal
rate of substitution. Thus, competitive markets have product mix efficiency.

![Product mix efficiency](https://i.ibb.co/DQGxdnr/production-possibility-and-indifference.png)

> Product mix efficiency requires that the marginal rate of transformation
> equals consumers’ marginal rate of substitution

To reach the highest level of consumers’ utility, the indifference curve and the
production possibilities schedule must be tangent (point E). At any other point,
such E’, consumer utility is lower than E. Thus, in a competitive market,
suppliers provide what consumers want. Producers are trying to produce at the
highest possible *Isoquant*, where as Consumers pursue the highest possible
*indifference curve*.



