---
layout: post
title: "Public Goods and publicly provided private goods"
date: 2019-02-25
authors: "Ty Yiu"
---

### Rival Consumption & Exclusion

To distinguish between private and public goods, it depends on whether the good
has the property of rival consumption and whether it is possible to exclude any
individual from the benefits of the good (without incurring great costs).

Thus, rival consumption means that if a good is used by one person, it cannot be
used by another person. Non-rival consumption refers to cases in which one
person's consumption does not detract from or prevents another person's
consumption. The second question relates to the property of exclusion. Can
someone be excluded from the consumption of a good? If exlusion is impossible
(or too expensive), then the use of price system is impossible because consumers
have no incentive to pay the price.

### Underconsumption, oversupply and user fees

If consumption is non-rival but exclusion is possible, market might lead to
*underconsumption* as the marginal benefit is higher than the marginal cost
(zero). But if there is no charge there will be no incentive for supplying the
good. In this case, inefficiency takes the form of *undersupply*.

If exclusion is possible, even if consumption is non-rival, governments can
charge *user fees*, to those that benefit from a publicly provided good or
service. E.g. toll roads, airline ticket tax. User fees are thought of as a
fairer way of raising revenues, as those who use the public facility the most
(presumably benefit the most) pay the most. However, consumption when non-rival,
will lead to user fees introducing inefficiency.

### Free rider problem

When exclusion is not possible individuals are reluctant to contribute
voluntarily to the support of public goods. This is known as the free rider
problem.  In a few cases non-excludable public goods are provided privately.
Usually when there is a large single consumer whose benefit is so large that it
pays for him/her to provide it.Theocharis PapadopoulosAlthough the
“selfish”nature of humanity is in the core of the free rider problem, recent
studies in experimental economics have suggested that economists might have
overemphasized it. 

### Spectrum of Goods

Generally, private goods have the properties of rival consumption and
excludability. Goods characterized by non-rival consumption and for which
exclusion is impossible are pure public goods.Goods characterized by either
non-rival consumption or excludability are impure public goods.

-Goods characterized by non-rival consumption and excludability are also known
as club goods.
-Goods characterized by rival consumption and non-excludability are also known
as common goods.  

![Spectrum of Goods](https://i.ibb.co/L5ShBR1/spectrum-of-goods.png)

### Global & Local Public Goods

The benefits of some public goods are enjoyed only locally -by those living in a
particular community. These are called local public goods. Theocharis
PapadopoulosHowever more and more public goods are global public goods, the
benefits of which accrue to anyone in the world. Global environment, global
health, global knowledge, and global security are some of them.

### Collective Action

Whenever there is a public good, there is need for collective action. Within a
country, the national government provides for national public goods (e.g.
national defence), and local governments provide for local  public goods (e.g.
street cleaning).  However there is no global government. Still, the
international community comes together to address those global public goods,
through treaties, agreements and international organizations.


## Publicly Provided Private Goods

> Private Goods provided by the Government

Publicly provided goods characterized by large marginal cost associated with
supplying additional individuals are referred to as publicly provided private
goods. Education is a typical example of publicly provided private good. 

### Overconsumption of publicly provided private goods

If a private good is provided freely by the government there is likely to be
overconsumption of the good as individuals will keep consuming it until their
marginal benefit is equal to zero.

![Overconsumption of publicly provided private
goods](https://i.ibb.co/GQgdq6W/overconsumption-of-publicly-provided-private-goods.png)

### Rationing Publicly Provided Private Goods

Given the inefficiencies arising from overconsumption when no charges are
imposed for publicly provided goods, governments often try to limit their
consumption. Any method restricting consumption of a good is called a rationing
system. There are three main methods of rationing publicly provided goods:

1. User Charges
2. Uniform Provision
3. Queuing

#### User Charges

> Users pay a fee for the good/service.

*Advantages*
: Those who benefit bear the cost

*Disadvantages*
: Results in undercosumptionAdministering pricing system adds transaction costs

#### Uniform Provision

> Governments supplies the same quantity of the service/good to everyone

*Advantages*
: Saves on transaction costs

*Disadvantages*
: Leads some to *overconsume* and others to *underconsume*

> High *demanders* may supplement public consumption, increasing total transaction costs

#### *Queing*

> Rather than charging individuals money for access to publicly provided goods
> and services, government requires that they pay a cost in waiting time

Advantages 
: Goods (like healthcare) allocated not necessarily on basis of who
is wealthiest

Disadvantages 
: Alternative basis of allocation (who has time to spare) may be
undesirable Time is wasted

## Public vs Private choice

There is a question of the magnitude of public provision of public and private
goods. Market economy uses the price mechanism to reach an effective resource
allocation. Decisions about resource allocation in the public sectors are
different. Individuals vote for representatives and these elected
representatives in turn, vote for a public budget and money is spent by a
variety of administrative agencies.

### The problem preference revelations

Individuals express their desirability of one private good versus another by
simple action, buying. Elections of public officials convey only limited
information about voters attitudes towards specific public goods. At best, they
convey a general notion that voters prefer more or less government spending.

For example, polls show how strong sentiment against deficits, however
inconsistent picture emerges regarding the trade-offs. Some polls suggest that
voters would be willing to pay higher taxes and accept expenditure cuts, while
others don't. Unless faced with concrete trade-offs it is hard to get voters
think seriously about their choices.

In private decisions, the decision maker knows their own preferences. Where as
in public decision, the decision maker must ascertain the preferences of those
on whose behalf they are making the decision.

### Hidden preferences

Even if individuals were asked directly about their preferences the may hide
their true preferences:  

- If what they have to pay does not depend on their answer, people tend to
  demand for more. People demand more of something they don’t have to pay for. 
- If what they have to pay does depend on their answer, people have an incentive
  to pretend that they enjoy the good much less than they really do. They know
  that their individual answer will have a negligible effect on the total amount
  supplied, and they would like to be free riders.

------------------------------------

## References

Stiglitz, J. and  J. Rosengard(2015) Economics of the Public Sector (4th ed.),
W.W. Norton & Company
