---
layout: post
title: "Tax Game Choices & Explanations"
date: 2019-03-24
authors: Ty Yiu
---

![Tax Game Choices](https://i.ibb.co/9pQnZ1D/Tax-game-choices.png)

> All Choices made for/in the game can be seen above in the attached image.

## Marginal Income Tax
The income tax is progressive, increasing as income increases. The reason for
my choice here is wealth-redistribution and is argument able with the usage of
taxpayer's contributions. I believe the contribution one gives back to the
community should equal the benefit they have from e.g. clean streets, maintained
roads, green parks et cetera. 

## Payroll Tax
The payroll tax is *relatively* low, as to minimise the base amount of money
taken from taxpayers before they even see a dime.

## Sales Tax
The sales tax is relatively high, initially that may have reduced spending as a
result, but the zero percent property tax will be relieved in turn. A common
problem to look out for is that locals don't go do their shopping somewhere
else, as it can often be seen in Switzerland.

## Property Tax
A zero percent property tax is chosen because there shouldn't be a tax on ones
property. There is an argument for the case in which the property value should
be taxed because of it being in a very nice area, which has been caused by the
surroundings and ultimately thanks to / responsibility of the state. I don't
agree with that *per se*, as higher sales tax should even out the situation. 

## Corporation Tax
Corporate tax is at an average 10%, nothing much special here. It is lower than
many countries, to incentivise entrepreneurial spirit and promote the formation
of businesses that will also in turn hopefully drive the local economy and thus
support a relatively high sales tax, strengthening the position in the market.

## Excise Taxes
For me, tobacco is as dangerous/bad as alcohol and should be treated that way.
In fact, following the UK's *psychoactive bill*, tobacco should even be
considered less harmful as alcohol has much greater psychoactive effects than
tobacco. Mine does not coincide with the public's opinion, thus the alcohol tax
is less than tobacco's to not become *paternalistic*.

### Tobacco
As above described.

### Alcohol
As above described.

### Gasoline
Gasoline on the other hand, has much greater implications for many more systems
it affects. Alcohol *only* damages your liver, tobacco has *passive smoking*,
but gasoline kills the planet. Coupled with subsidies, the very high gasoline
tax should be able to get through. A *green future* (CSR) campaign, may help
support this point for a government.

## Wealth Tax
There is a wealth tax, but a small one. The argumentation behind that can be
that the local economy / workforce / ambience is much more productive and thus
supports the wealth of the community. The Human resources, property values,
everything is better and should therefore be compensated. The community being
the *wealthy* and the wealthy being part of the community, with the focus on the
aspect of empowering the local community.

