---
layout: post
title: "Data collection on Facebook"
author: "Ty Yiu"
date: "28-October-2018"
categories: ACC220 Uni 
---

Nowadays, third party companies collect data on facebook very successfully 
and in petabyte volumes per day.
That data is often used for profiling.
Profiling is the process, in which they will gather pieces of data, seemingly
unrelated to each another, which in accumulation of many pieces reveals many
aspects of ones character.
Those companies can create very accurate profiles about one. 
Statistical models are used in combination with big data, to reveal
relationships between character traits. These models only work with immense
amount of data. The regulation landscape so far, made it possible for companies
implementing profiling, to suceed with gathering these big amounts of data. The
future possibility of such could be limited by according legislative action. The
profile that is created, may now be used as means for several objectives. Mostly
this objective revolves around *tailored advertising*. This concept describes
how an ad about glasses shall be shown to someone interested in or in need for
glasses and how these ads are shown to these people online. Facebook data, or
any social media plattform, will have data about you in more volume than most
regular websites. That data is about you personally and about your interests, as
you are portraying yourself as one within your friend group. Your social media
will probably mimic your friends one's considering the self-identification
issues related to social media. This data can be perfectly used for profiling,
it often captures emotional influenced moments, decisions, impulses. These can
be and are exploited by advertisers and companies trying to sell you their
product. The problems arise in the considerations, that these firms can have
such a accurate profile about someone, given big data and well engineered
algorithms, that the firms may even know you better than your parents do.
 



