---
layout: post
title: "How to Run a Blockchain on a Deserted Island with Pen and Paper"
date: 2018-05-10
categories: Tech Blockchain
---


![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2600/1*BjR6DEBCmQ4bvWDxr6ynwQ.jpeg)

If you’re ever stranded on a deserted island, knowing how to run the process of
*decentralized consensus* — or in other words, operate a very simple blockchain
by hand — can prove to be very useful. All you need is some fellow survivors,
this post, a pen and a few pieces of paper.

If you’re not certain this skill is useful for your survival, be sure to read
[my last
post](https://medium.com/@talkol/why-decentralized-consensus-blockchain-is-good-for-business-5ff263468210)
on how blockchain can vastly improve island life.

*****

Let’s go back to that original story and go through the process with our
fearless heroes, who just crashed on a deserted island somewhere in the South
Pacific — **Hugo**, **Sawyer**, **Kate** and **Jack**.

A short recap: the gang is trying to implement *IslandCoin*, a revolutionary new
currency that will bring an end to the island’s crippled barter economy. The
gang has agreed it’s fair if each of them starts with 100 coins. Since they
don’t have metal to mint actual coins, they’ll have to make do with a few pieces
of paper. Riddled with trust issues, the gang hasn’t been able to agree on one
person to keep track of balances. Their only option is to maintain the balances
*together*.

We’ll start with what is probably the simplest blockchain implementation for our
island use case. In future posts we can explore other implementations and tie
them to concepts like *Proof of Work* and *Proof of Stake — *this will help us
see their benefits and drawbacks. But for now, let’s start as simple as it gets.

*****

What are we trying to achieve? It’s very simple actually — all we’re trying to
do is maintain a simple table of balances on a piece of paper. This table will
show how many coins each of our heroes has. The trick is, because we can’t have
*one* piece of paper that holds the only source of truth — we’re going to have
to keep things equal and let each of the gang maintain their own version — this
is the *decentralized* part. And naturally, we’re also going to hope that all 4
pieces of paper eventually show the same thing — this is the *consensus* part.

So what would this piece of paper look like?

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*lcFfUboJfzFlgOKHj77QEg.png)

This paper is the *first* one we agree on — that’s why it’s marked as day 1.
Where did these balances come from? We’ve previously agreed it’s fair that each
of the gang starts with 100 coins. We’re also going to need one of the survivors
to write this paper. It doesn’t really matter who, so let’s take Hugo. He will
be the one to publish this paper to everybody and make sure they each save a
copy (the island has an amazing photocopy machine, I forgot to mention).

Since coin balances are expected to change, we’re going to create a new updated
piece of paper at the end of every day. It may not always be Hugo who publishes
the update though — we want to keep things as fair as possible after all.

Another important part, due to the lack of mutual trust in the group, is having
each of the gang confirm the status update individually. An easy way to achieve
this is having each one of the survivors sign each of the papers — but only if
they agree with what’s written on it.

How many people need to sign a paper for it to be considered final and approved?
We need to reach *consensus*, so a majority will do. Since we have 4 people in
total, a majority is at least 3 out of 4. The paper above was signed by all four
so it’s definitely final. Why don’t we want to require all four signatures on
all papers? Because this will allow one individual to jeopardize the entire
process. If Sawyer goes on a fishing trip for a few days, the gang can’t update
balances until he gets back — this gives one person too much power. Why do we
even need a majority? Why isn’t 2 out of 4 signatures enough? Because if we only
require 2 out of 4, we may end up with 2 people (like Hugo and Sawyer) signing
one version of balances, and the other 2 people (Kate and Jack) signing a
different version that doesn’t match. We can’t have two conflicting versions of
reality both considered final.

*****

On the morning of the second day, Kate wants to buy a tomato. Hugo sells
tomatoes for 2 coins each. She wants to transfer 2 coins to Hugo. Kate takes a
new piece of paper and writes the transfer on it:

It’s Kate’s first action ever, so she labels it as such. In addition, Kate signs
this paper. We have to have her signature to make sure nobody else can forge a
transfer request on her account.

The end of the second day is approaching and the gang wants to publish an
updated set of balances. Hugo published the paper for the first day and
collected everybody’s signatures. It makes sense to take turns doing so. The
gang agrees to use a simple rotating order: Hugo, Sawyer, Kate, Jack, Hugo,
Sawyer, and so forth. This means that publishing the status paper for day 2 is
Sawyer’s responsibility. The paper he publishes reflects Kate’s transfer:

This paper that Sawyer made isn’t final yet because it’s only signed by Sawyer.
He needs to collect more signatures. Sawyer goes through the gang and asks each
one to verify and sign it. This paper is very easy to verify. First, the
verifier needs to look in his own collection of papers and find the status paper
that shows the balances for the previous day (day 1 in this case). Next, the
verifier needs to go over the new list of transfers. In this case, we only have
one transfer by Kate. This transfer is easy to verify, we can make sure it’s
indeed signed by Kate and we can make sure Kate indeed has enough coins in her
balance to give this amount to Hugo.

Once every island inhabitant completes their verification process and signs the
paper, Sawyer now has a final status paper for day 2 to publish to everybody.
Everybody makes a copy and goes to sleep happy and content.

*****

Day 3 is upon us. The system is working well and everybody is excited to spend
their coins. Hugo wants to buy some firewood from Sawyer for 10 coins. Sawyer
wants to get some pills from Jack for 25 coins and Jack is hungry for a tomato
and wants to give Hugo 2 coins to buy one. They each create a piece of paper
detailing their transfer:

As evening approaches, the person publishing today’s balances is Kate. To make
sure Kate includes these transfers in her paper proposal, they each need to give
her a copy of their transfer request. It actually makes sense to give copies to
everybody because the person wanting to perform a transfer doesn’t necessarily
remember whose turn it is to publish today’s update.

Jack lingers with getting the copy of his transfer request to Kate and by the
time he brings it to her, her balance status of the day is already written:

Jack is frustrated that this balance status doesn’t include his own transfer.
This means Hugo won’t receive Jack’s payment for the tomato, and won’t give Jack
the tomato for dinner. Jack is going to go to sleep hungry tonight. He storms
out to look for something else to eat and doesn’t sign Kate’s paper proposal for
the day. Luckily, Kate is able to get enough signatures from the rest of the
gang:

Kate managed to get 3 signatures on the paper, each verifying that the balances
indeed match the transfers and yesterday’s balances. We have a majority, so this
status sheet is considered final.

*****

It’s day 4 and nobody knows where Jack is. He went fishing the night before, got
caught out in a storm and didn’t return to camp. It might be problematic because
it’s Jack’s turn today to publish the balance update.

Kate wants to make a couple of transfers today, she writes them on a piece of
paper and gives a copy to everybody:

Evening approaches and Jack isn’t back yet. The gang had previously agreed that
it’s his turn to publish the balances, but he’s nowhere to be found, so this
day’s balance update is skipped.

*****

It’s day 5, and Hugo is the one responsible for publishing the daily update.
It’s been raining for a few days and Hugo wants a warmer place to sleep. He asks
Sawyer to build him a small wooden hut. Sawyer wants 200 coins for the job. It’s
a bit of a problem because Hugo only has 98 coins. Hugo has a crazy idea though,
he is the one publishing the balance sheet today, so why not add a crazy
transfer of this amount to Sawyer anyways?

There are no other transfers today. Hugo has Kate’s transfers from yesterday
though, and Jack’s transfer from the day before that didn’t make it in
eventually. He adds all of those, together with his new crazy transfer:

Hugo signs this update although his transfer doesn’t really make sense. To make
this status update final, he needs to collect 2 more signatures. When he
approaches Sawyer and Kate, they notice that on the previous final balance sheet
(from day 3), Hugo had 92 coins. How can he send 200 to Sawyer? They refuse to
sign this balance sheet until he fixes this error and removes this invalid
transfer. He reluctantly agrees and publishes a new balance sheet which is
correct. They eventually sign it:

This balance update is final because it has 3 signatures.

*****

It’s the morning of day 6. Jack finally comes back to camp. He had a rough
couple of days with the storm and all. He wasn’t part of the discussions in the
last two days and missed announcements of new transfers and publications of new
balance updates. He’s actually unsure how many coins he has. He finds the first
fellow survivor he sees and asks for the latest updates he missed. He is given
the final update for day 5 and the approved update Kate that published on day 3.

It’s easy for Jack to synchronize back with the rest of the gang. He can see
that these balance updates were indeed signed at least 3 times, so he can be
relatively safe that they’re ok. He can also perform the calculations himself
based on these updates and the latest update he has (from day 2). This will
allow Jack to participate in today’s transfers just like he didn’t miss
anything.

*****

The system seems to be working well. It’s true that it’s a bit simplistic, but
it’s enough for what these island inhabitants need. Well, we can’t have a
functioning blockchain without a white paper! The gang sits down and celebrates
the accomplishment by publishing this magnificent one:

*****

Why is this considered a blockchain? For starters, each piece of paper published
daily represents a *block*. Each block is numbered and points to the previous
one — forming a chain of blocks. In order to verify the current state of
balances, any observer must start from the beginning of the chain (day 1 — the
*genesis block*) and verify each of the blocks one after the other in
succession. The balances are built incrementally.

Is this an ideal blockchain implementation? Probably not. It can be improved in
many ways. For example, it only supports these 4 inhabitants. What happens if
another survivor crashes on the island? Will this protocol be able to
accommodate them? This protocol is also currently *permissioned*, how can we
turn it to be *permissionless*? What if we wanted to modify it to use *Proof of
Work* or maybe *Proof of Stake*?

Well, we’re going to explore these ideas in the next posts in this series.

*****

**Tal is a founder at Orbs.com — a public blockchain infrastructure for large
scale consumer applications with millions of users. To learn more and read the
Orbs white papers **[click here](https://orbs.com/white-papers)**. [Follow on
**[Telegram](https://t.me/orbs_network)**,
**[Twitter](https://twitter.com/orbs_network)**,
**[Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/ORBS_Network/)**]**

* [Blockchain](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/blockchain?source=post)
* [Cryptocurrency](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/cryptocurrency?source=post)
* [Crypto](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/crypto?source=post)
* [Ethereum](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/ethereum?source=post)
* [Bitcoin](https://hackernoon.com/tagged/bitcoin?source=post)

### [Tal Kol](https://hackernoon.com/@talkol)

Consumer-ready blockchain. Founder at Orbs.com. React fan. Ex Kin by Kik head of
engineering. Ex Wix.com head of mobile engineering.

### [Hacker Noon](https://hackernoon.com/?source=footer_card)

how hackers start their afternoons.

Simple and elegant explanation of blockchain technology. Very nice :)

Best blockchain explainer yet. Nice work!

The first example of a blockchain I have been able to comprehend. Thank you for
this :)

Great post!

Wow. This is the first real, understandable definition of blockchain that I’ve
ever seen. 💡

I miss Lost…

Love how the fonts represent their characters. Great job!

Could I translate your post “How to Run a Blockchain on a Deserted Island with
Pen and Paper” into Japanese on my blog? I’d like to share it in Japan.

I wonder if the Jack got his tomato or they just cheated him ;)

Can you explain how a 51% attack works using the above?

This is the cleanest and most elegant piece of work explaining how blockchain
works. It’s also entertaining. Well done!

hilariously well explained. Chapeau.

### Authorization

Hi Tal Kol,

I hope this message finds you well.

This is Ajian, from Ethfans.org, which is a China based Ethereum developer
community, dedicating to promoting Ethereum and blockchain technology in China.
One of our main projects is translating selected…

This is the best illustration/ story to explain blockchain I’ve read. Ever. I
will use this to explain blockchain from now on.

Thank you!

This has to be the best intro to how block chain works!

Yep, we could start a blockchain right here in the comments. But what about a
Holochain?

Nice article well explained.

So simple and elegant, thanks!

I think that ought to say 92! It’s Kate who has a balance of 98 coins at the end
of day #3.

What an excellent post. Thank you very much.

I think you’re a good storyteller, you should try to write a novel!

Im now in my Dissertation for my doctoral degree in Information Technology here
in the Philippines, I am eyeing Beyond Blockchain as a research topic because it
is timely and interesting. This article of yours (IslandCoin) really catch my
attention. Kudos to…

Tal Kol Great write-up!!! Do you mind if I translate it in French? (All credit
to you) Its critical to spend this type of write-up to everybody around the
world.

Nice post! Thanks for sharing. Fun and easy to read/follow.

I’m at Consensys and working on a blockchain simulation our community team can
play with people they meet at meetups or conferences. Would love if you had a
minute for feedback on it (or anyone else on this chain for that matter.)

Hey! Great work!

Do I have your permission to translate this to Portugues (Brazil) and to publish
it in my medium?

Hi Tal Kol,

Loved how you explain Blockchain in a very comprehensive way.

I’d love to translate them into Japanese so your thoughts can be shared in Japan
as well. Would it be possible?
