---
layout: post
title: "Building a NFC Scanner App with CoreNFC in Swift "
date: 2019-03-21
---

<span class="figcaption_hack">NFC Product Scanner iOS App</span>

Near-field communication (NFC) is the technology that enables contactless
communication between 2 devices within a certain distance (usually about 4 cm).

Nowadays, NFC is being utilized in contactless payment systems, electronic
identification card, electronic tickets, and to share information such as
contacts, photo, video, or URL. Such labels or cards that can be used to read
the information using NFC are called NFC Tags.

According to Wikipedia, there are 3 communication modes that can be performed in
a full NFC device:

> **NFC card emulation**<br> Enables NFC-enabled devices such as smartphones to
> act like smart cards, allowing users to perform transactions such as payment or
ticketing.

> **NFC reader/writer**<br> Enables NFC-enabled devices to read information stored
> on inexpensive NFC tags embedded in labels or smart posters.

> **NFC peer-to-peer**<br> Enables two NFC-enabled devices to communicate with
> each other to exchange information in an `adhoc` fashion.

### Current State of NFC in iOS

NFC in iOS was started with the release of Apple Pay in 2014. iPhone 7 & iPhone
7 Plus were the first devices with built in NFC hardware that can be used to
perform contactless payment using Apple Pay. However, Apple didn’t provide any
API for third party developers to use the NFC capability beyond Apple Pay
functionality.

In iOS 11, Apple finally introduced the CoreNFC framework that enabled third
party developers to read NFC tags within their apps. The API only supports
reading NFC tags when the app is running on the foreground.

In iOS 12, with the release of Apple new iPhones: Xr, Xs, Xs Max, Apple finally
introduced the ability to scan NFC tags without running the app using those
devices. It also handles redirecting the scan to the associated app using Apple
Universal Link mechanism.

As of right now, CoreNFC doesn’t have the capability to write to NFC tags. I
really wish iOS 13 will provide the capability for third party apps to write to
tags as the hardware needed to perform the write is already there.

### What We Will Build

In this tutorial, we are going to build a simple app that act as a product
scanner. Here are the main features of the app:

1.  The app will scan NFC tags and get the associated URL to retrieve the product
SKU ID;
1.  The app then searches its local data store with the particular SKU ID;
1.  If found, the app will display the details of the product, such as name, image,
description, price, and availability;
1.  Scan NFC tags without running the app by using Apple Universal Link & Firebase
Hosting.

### Starting the Project

You can clone the starter project source code from the GitHub Repository below:

The starter project contains all the custom table view cells, assets that we
will use in our app UI, and the `Product` model.

#### Product Model & Local Data Store

We use a `Product` model with several attributes to represent a product. Keep in
mind that the ID of the product is the unique identifier for each product and it
will be used by the store to find the product.

    struct Product {
        
        let id: String
        let name: String
        let description: String
        let price: String
        let inStock: Bool
        let image: UIImage?
    }

Next, let’s create the `ProductStore` class. This is a `Singleton` object that
stores the hardcoded products array in memory. It provides the interface to get
the associated product with the given SKU ID. If you want, you can store the
product inside the local storage using Core Data, SQLite, or even retrieve it
from network.

#### The Main Screen UI

<span class="figcaption_hack">Main Screen</span>

The main screen contains only the single `UILabel` and `UIButton` for the user
to tap and begin the NFC scanning session. All the code for the main screen is
written within the `MainViewController`. Later, we will add the handler inside
the `scanTapped:` method to begin our scanning session.

#### The Product Detail Screen UI

<span class="figcaption_hack">Product Detail Screen UI</span>

The product detail screen is a subclass of `UITableViewController`. It will
populate the rows using the product passed from the presenting view controller.
The screen displays the name, image, description, and availability of a product.
The code is contained in `ProductViewController` class.

#### Prepare NFC Tags with Related SKU ID

<span class="figcaption_hack">Writable NFC Tags</span>

To perform this step, you need to buy NFC tags that you can use to write to. To
write data to the tags, you can use an Android phone that has a NFC capability.
You can use various app from the Google Play Store to write the SKU ID to the
tags. Here is the link for the app I used:

You need to write the SKU in the following format:


The app will read the tags that contain payload with an URI format. Then, it
will get the last path of the URI. In this case, the last path will be the SKU
ID of the product. Use the SKU ID from one of the products above as a test.

#### Using Core NFC API to Start Scanning Session

Let’s start writing the actual code to begin the NFC scanning session. With the
SDK, you will be amazed how simple it is to implement NFC in your iOS apps. Here
is the sample code:

First, we need to import `CoreNFC` at the top of the file and declare a property
to store the `NFCNDEFReaderSession` object. Inside the `scanTapped:` method, we
initialize the scanning session with an alert message for detecting NFC Data
Exchange Format (NDEF) tags. You do not need to worry about the UI of the
scanning session which will be provided by the framework. You only need to set
the delegate to be notified when the tags are found. Also, you have to provide
the delegates to handle errors. In this case, we set the `MainViewController` as
the delegate.

The MainViewController class needs to implement the
`NFCNDEFReaderSessionDelegate` protocol. There are 2 required methods to
implement:

1.  `readerSession(session: NFCNDEFReaderSession, didDetectNDEFs messages:)`: It
will be invoked when the session finds a new tag.
1.  `readerSession(_session: NFCNDEFReaderSession, didInvalidateWithError error:
Error)`: It will be invoked when an error has occurred or the scanning session
has ended.

Here are the steps we perform inside the processing tag method:

1.  Make sure to check if the message and record is available.
1.  Check if the record format is a type of URI of `NFCWellKnown`.
1.  Initialize the string using the payload data.
1.  Get the last path component of the URI containing the SKU ID.
1.  Query the Product Store passing the SKU ID to retrieve the associated product.
1.  If the product is found, we present the ProductViewController passing the
product.
1.  If product is not found, we display an alert informing the user that the SKU for
the tags is not found.

If an error occurs or the scanning session has ended, we will:

* Check if the error exists and make sure the error is not triggerd by the user’s
action; and
* Display an alert telling that the scanning session has been invalidated.

Build and run the app. Tap the begin scan button, and then tap your tags. It
should present the product detail screen related to the SKU ID it read from the
tag.

<span class="figcaption_hack">NFC Scan Session</span>

#### Implementing Background NFC Scan Using Apple Universal Link

To implement the background NFC scan, you need to have a valid URL domain that
hosts the `AASA (apple-app-site-association)` file. This file will be used to
associate your website domain with the app. The file will contain the app’s
`Bundle ID` and the path that allows the app to access.

Here is the format of the file, it’s using JSON structure. Remember to replace
the following `appID` with your` Bundle ID`. The prefix `JFGXEWX` is the `Team
ID`. For testing purpose, we will just allow the app to access all the paths
using the wildcard “*”.

    {
      "applinks": {
        "apps": [],
        "details": [
          {
            "appID": “JFGXEWX.com.alfianlosari.NFCProductScanner",
            "paths": [
              "*"
            ]
          }
        ]
      }
    }

The next step is to host the file in your domain by uploading the file to your
server. Put the file either at
`https://<<yourdomain>>/apple-app-site-association `or at
`https://<<yourdomain>>/.well-known/apple-app-site-association`. Make sure your
domain support `https` and you upload the file without the `json` extension. You
can use the free domain hosting services like Firebase Hosting, GitHub Hosting,
or many other free options to host the file.

The last step is to add the associated domains inside the project’s Xcode
Capabilities Tab.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Xcode Capabilities Tab</span>

The format of the associated domain is `applinks:YOUR_DOMAIN`.

#### Handling Background Reading of NFC inside App Delegate

You can test the background scan using the NFC tags. Make sure you have written
the URL in your NFC Tag with the format of `https://YOUR_DOMAIN/SKU_ID`.

In home screen, tap the NFC tags and it should display a notification banner
that you can tap on. The system will redirect it automatically to your app using
the Apple Universal Link which we have set up earlier.

The app will just display the main UI and do nothing. In order to let the app
respond appropriately from the background scan, we need to override the
`continueUserActivity` method in `AppDelegate` :

Let’s look into the tasks we perform inside this method.

1.  We check if the user activity type is the type of
`NSUserActivityTypeBrowsingWeb`.
1.  We check if the message payload and record exists from the user activity
`ndefMessagePayload` property.
1.  We check if the record type is in `URI` or `NFCWellKnown` format.
1.  We extract the string from the record payload data.
1.  We get the SKU ID from the last path component.
1.  We query the product store with the SKU ID.
1.  If found, we retrieve the `MainViewController` from the `window root view
controller` and invoke the present product detail screen passing the product.

Run and build the project. Then, scan the tags from the home screen and tap the
notification banner. The app should open the corresponding product detail
screen.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Background NFC Scan</span>

### Conclusion

Congratulations! We finally finished building our NFC product scanner iOS app.
This technology is really useful when you want to communicate and pass data
easily. It’s useful for commerce business, payment system, and many more
industries. Let’s hope Apple will add the capability to write to NFC tags in iOS
13 later this year. Happy Swifting 😋!

Here is the completed source code for the project on GitHub repository.

----------------------

**Follow us on social media platforms:**<br> Facebook:
[facebook.com/AppCodamobile/](http://facebook.com/AppCodamobile/)<br> Twitter:
[twitter.com/AppCodaMobile](https://twitter.com/AppCodaMobile)<br> Instagram:
[instagram.com/AppCodadotcom](http://instagram.com/AppCodadotcom)

#### If you enjoyed this article, please click the 👏 button and share to help others
find it! Feel free to leave a comment below.

* [iOS](https://medium.com/tag/ios?source=post)
* [Nfc](https://medium.com/tag/nfc?source=post)
* [iOS App Development](https://medium.com/tag/ios-app-development?source=post)
* [Corenfc](https://medium.com/tag/corenfc?source=post)
* [Cocoa Touch](https://medium.com/tag/cocoa-touch?source=post)

### [Alfian Losari](https://medium.com/@alfianlosari)

Mobile, Web, a bit of backend Software Developer and Lifelong Learner. Currently
building super app @ Go-Jek.

### [AppCoda Tutorials](https://medium.com/appcoda-tutorials?source=footer_card)

A great collections of Swift and iOS app development tutorials. To contribute,
tweet us [@appcodamobile](https://medium.com/@appcodamobile)
