## Questions

1. How would you describe the leadership style of Steve Jobs as depicted in the
   film? Use examples.
2. Aaron Sorkin has been accused for unfairly depicting Jobs in a bad light. Do
   some research and write your opinion on that? Is there a problem if thatâ€™s
   true or it is acceptable artistic freedom?
3. Steve Jobs was forced out of the company he co-founded. Was he a victim or
   did he have responsibility for that?

## Notes

1. He's autocratic, commanding, non-sensible for in-house recommendations et
   cetera.

2. My opinion is, that Steve was probably worse in the movie, especially with
   dramatic effects added to the scenery to make the experience of the movie
   have bigger of an influence on the audience watching. It is absolutely no
   problem and is completely acceptable as artistic freedom. The limits of
   artistic freedom start where they interfere with the freedom of societal
   entities. The movie didn't need a look-alike like *Ashton Kutcher* in the
   2013 version of the movie, but an authentic and really good actor to bring
   across the dramatically evolving story. Even the depiction, let it be worse
   than he actually was in real life, is acceptable as artistic freedom, as
   aspects sometimes need to be hyperbolically expressed to be distinct enough
   for everyone in the audience to pick up.

3. The board would say he is responsible for his actions and thus the removal of
   Steve was logically supported. From Steve's point of view, he was forced out
   of the thing he created and envisioned, which doesn't seem fair. The matter
   of the fact is, that it depends whom you ask and whether they see Steve as a
   victim in his role or not. Ultimately, he came back to the company, as a
   different man one could say and thus it could be said that even though he may
   have been forced out logically backed and sensible at the time, apple needed
   jobs.


## Executive Summary


This Report is intended to function as an analysis of the *Steve Jobs (2015)*
movie under consideration of Jobs's, notoriously known, leadership style and the
depiction in movie in contrast to reality. This report also looks at the
timespan in which Jobs was *forced* out of *Apple* and later on reinstated. 

The movie, as all movies are made to be pleasing towards a certain audience and
thus has made changes to how certain events went down or how a character is
depicted. The artistic freedom is an important freedom to wield when adapting a
movie to be more pleasing for commercial reasons, making the movie more
interesting for watchers. 

## Jobs's Leadership Style

Steve's Leadership style was lacking any glimpse of politeness or gentleness. He
treated his employees in a rough verbal manner and didn't restrain his
impulsiveness nearby them. Jobs pushed his people to do better and work harder,
which he is also often being praised for. The fact that his leadership style
dramatically changed after the point of his returning, wasn't particularly
*outstanding* to the watcher. Before leaving Apple, his leadership style was
commanding with an autocratic undertone. He was impulsive and didn't hesitate to
publicly express his anger nearby or directed towards employees. Employees were
intimidated by him and feared the consequence of failure. Jobs himself saw his
leadership style as more motivational in nature than suppressive or abusive. He
famously said that *the people working for him are skilled enough and wanted
enough to go to any big corporation, but rather stay at apple to get amazing
things done*, which emphasises the point of him being motivational instead of
being suppressive. 

## The depiction of Jobs in the movie in contrast to reality

## Jobs's removal and reinstating Jobs 

## References

When Steve Jobs Got Fired By Apple. (2019). ABC News. Retrieved 15 March 2019, from [here](https://abcnews.go.com/Technology/steve-jobs-fire-company/story?id=14683754)
