---
layout: post
title: "Populism caused by Globalisation"
date: 2018-12-10
---
## Introduction 

Populistic movements have soared in recent years, believably due to
globalization. The objective of this report is to assert wether or not populism
is purely due to globalization with consideration of the United States of
America and Germany, respectively. Populism can be seen as *avocat* for the good
of *the people*. Globalization as the international expansion of businesses,
henceforth, trade. Analyzed for the United States as well as Germany, will be
the aspect of recent drastic increase of migration. Both will furthermore be
examined considering cultural influences such as terrorism, wish for sovereignty
, as well as union, and a already long existing geographical discrepancy.
Feelings of being left out by society roam in the heads of the old German
democratic republic’s people. The east-west discrepancy in Germany and the
consequent different political agenda create room for populistic movements to
form in the first place and often polarizes the population. This is the case
with near extremist left and right wing parties, such as *”Die linken (the
left)”* or *”Alternative für Deutschland, AFD (Alternative for Germany)”*. The
drastic increase in migration fueled many of these populistic views and
movements and is often direct cause.  The United States of America have also
experienced similar migration phenomena, though of different nature. The
european migration crisis is caused by conflict majorly, where as in the states,
there are more equal factors, meaning the migration is more due to economic
reasons. The perception of migration in both countries is as such different. The
history of terrorism in the States provides a prepositioned bias towards
immigration and their constant crave for independence and sovereignty thus
create populistic motifs in the people.

## Factors in the USA 

Globalisation and Trade Globalisation has enabled worldwide free trade between
different states. Yet, it has brought the realisation of joblesses, a decline in
income all paired with the negatives related to the chinese aadvantage. It can
be said that the the US and China trade was  is not mainly about trade, it is
driven primarily by political factors that are creating real economic impacts
(L.J. Lau, 2018).  Hence, this has become true with china holding a competitive
advantage, the amount of goods traded and a loss of sovereignty that all these
elements have boboled together to fuel the populist sentiments in the US. 

Currently part of  the anxiety felt by US citizens regarding the trade war stems
from china's competitive advantage.  Moreover, this comes from their inability
to  keep pace  with China’s production abilities due to there lower labour
costs, manufacture costs, material costs and scale of production. This all is
related to the economic theory of economies of scale where we can note that as
the amount of production increases the costs decrease. This has lead to the
comparably cheap products forcing americans to respond with protectionism
(tariffs and quotas)  as this would help combat the trade deficit of 375 billion
US Dollars, in 2017. (BBC News, 2018). This all has contributed to an uneasy
economic sentiment in America encouraging a more nationalist view. 

 
Fig.1 bbc.co.uk , 2018 The graph demonstrate in  real numbers that as China
exported $500 billion worth of good to the US, leading to the $375.23BN deficit
in 2017. 








When looking at sovereignty (the ability of a state to self govern) we can see
that America is transitioning from being a global  superpower to one three. This
is due to more large players in the global world that have the power to
influence their respective regions when setting policy. Furthermore, this makes
America as it feels the impact of outside bodies more reactionary, eg. setting
up tariffs etc as there ‘’international competitiveness of the US declines’’ (T.
Petersen, 2017). This boils down to America experiencing less power and a loss
of national sovereignty. Indoubliblatly, when looking at globalization we can
see that this has lead to the decline of sovereignty in the US as it has helped
other global player rise, it is from this connection we can see that populist
sentiment stems from with more people feeling pushed around. 

Overall, we can note that due to the competitive advantage of china, the trade
deficit and a loss of strategy we can see why the average american citizen feels
disenfranchised and fears losing their jobs due to the global impacts. 

Immigration, culture and terror When looking at populism in America it is
important to consider both global and domestic factors. These notably include
migration both legal as well as illegal, the American culture and the fear of
terrorism. 

Intriguingly the graphs below showcase the main data surrounding legal
immigration statistics in America. This demonstrates that there are less
native-born workers in the economy, yet, the business formation and business
ownership rates are higher for immigrants. Moreover, foreign workers will earn
less than their American counterparts  with the same level of education until
the level of a bachelor degree or higher in which case they in fact earn more.
This is significant when considering why Americans might begin to feel like they
are losing out as a non-americans are more lightly to own a business, will work
for less when doing lower skill jobs but also will get paid more for high
skilled labour.  







Fig. 2-5 (Inovova, 2017)


On the other hand, illegal migrant populations in the US seem to have stabilised
despite higher rates of removals with less returns yearly (Robinson, 2018). This
means that the population is able to support itself, this can partly be seen in
fig. 5 as the level of border apprehensions in 2018 so fare is already much
higher than what it was in 2017 despising not being as bad as in 2014. This
points out how many people have been caught, removed and returned so the number
of successful immigrants is unaccounted for. This can be viewed as a byproduct
of globalisation with economic migrants trying to enter the US at higher levels. 



Fig 5-  7. (Robinson, 2018)

Furthermore, the US culture and fear of terrorism also play a role. With the
American culture valuing independence, equality, informality and directness
(International Student, 2018). Creating the lens the US people see the would and
shape there international and domestic policy.  Additionally, due to the
incident of 911 terrorist attacks are a perceived problem in the US, which has
lead to some Americans to become sceptical of other cultures associated with the
incident. Yet, interestingly this trend in recent times is steadily decreasing
as the average person is not viewing it like the threat it once was seen to be
(Council on Foreign Relations, 2009). This is not to say it is no longer a
problem but rather other problems have come to the front to replace the level of
fear people feel. 

Fig.8 (Council on Foreign Relations, 2009)
 


## German Factors  

Migration Crisis Germany is the second most popular Migration destination in the
world, after the United States. Of all the 27 European Union states, Germany has
the second highest percentage of immigrants in its population after Sweden. The
country has 14.8% of their population immigrants.  Germany has undergone
extensive immigration and emigration flows throughout its history. Today, more
than 22 percent of the population have a migration background. The prevalent
maxim that Germany is not an immigration country blocked migration and
integration policy reforms until the new millennium.

Fig 10. (Financial Times, n.d.)



Fig. 11 (Financial Times, 2015)

The reactions among the population oscillated between euphoric readiness to take
in refugees and violent rejection of those seeking protection, between a
"welcome culture" and the demand for isolation, between cosmopolitanism and
nationalism. At the same time, violent acts against refugees and their
accommodation facilities also increased significantly.

The populist right-wing party "Alternative for Germany" (AfD) managed to enter
several state parliaments, sometimes even with double-digit voting results, by
instrumentalizing the topic of migration. Since the elections on 24 September
2017 the AfD is also represented in the German Bundestag. Across Germany, the
AfD won 12.6 percent of the vote, making it the third-largest group in
parliament. For example, in the east German state of Saxony, the anti-immigrant
party came first, winning 27 percent.

Fig. 12 (Hill, 2017) 

Fig. 13 (Federal Office for Migration and Refugee, 2018)

In eastern Germany, many Germans feel foreign in their own country and are
afraid that immigration is changing their homeland rapidly. And that is why a
lot of eastern German people choose the AfD, because the they feel that the
refugees take their workplace away or even don’t like them because they are
afraid to go out alone at night. That is why eastern Germans hate the immigrants
so much because they are afraid of them and their different culture. Ironically
, as to be seen in Fig 13. The eastern German states only took in about 5
percent of the  entire mass of  refugees. So even tho there are virtually a few
ten thousand refugees, the aversion and hate against migrants is by far the
strongest in the east. 

Many Germans also felt left alone by the European Union as Germany took in
nearly 2 million refugees, while other states still refuse to take in their
share. This of course further strengthen the position of parties like the Afd.

However, the answer on whether globalization is the reason for the migration and
hence the rise of German Populism, the answer is yes and no. The war in Syria or
Iraq has not much to do with globalization, while many refugees from Africa flee
because of economic reasons that are largely due to globalization.

East VS West Germany Besides the Topic of Migration There are other topics that
strongly contributed to the rise of populism in Germany, especially in the east.
Some of those have a strong link to globalization others don’t. First of all,
there is a strong  sentiment in the east that since the fall of the GDR, eastern
Germans have been forgotten by the Government. They feel like second class
Germans.  Despite the Western Germans paying the so called Solidaritätszuschlag
to rebuild the Eastern German infrastructure and numerous incentives for large
corporations to invest in Eastern Germany, given by the government, many people
in the East still treated unfairly.

In the 30 years that have passed now since the reunification, billions worth of
western investment have been made, however the attempts to create the
‘prosperous landscapes’ that were promised by Chancellor Kohl, were hampered by
the high structural unemployment following the closing of the formerly states
owned factories and production plants in the late 90’s. From an capitalist
economic point of view this step was the only choice to be made, however, it
left three generations of Eastern German workers without job and non
transferable skills and training since the GDR equipment they used was outdated.
So the companies that were willing to invest in Eastern Germany could not find
skilled workers and actually started to bring in employees from the West,
leaving the eastern Germans without any prospects. That way only two or three
‘hotspots of happyness’ were created in cities like Leipzig, Dresden and
Görlitz. In smaller cities and the countryside the capital failed to move in and
create a functioning business environment and therefore jobs. In terms of
populism the cities that profited from the western influx of investment,as to be
seen in Fig.12. the polls show a statistically lower support for the populist
ideas of the AFD, what actually shows that not globalization is the prime source
of eastern German populism , but years of failed capitalistic policies.
  
Fig. 14-15 (Noack, 2014) 

 To tackle the failures of the economic policies of the 90’s the German
 government set up the Agenda 2010. Infact, many Eastern Germans now had work
 for the first time in years. However, most workers no had to work in the
 minijob sector below the minimum wage and without any prospect of economic
 progress. The statistics actually prove that even today the average wage and
 pension payment in Eastern Germany is much lower than in Western Germany.  As
 the opportunities for economic and social progress are to this very day remain
 lower than in the West, the well educated youth moves to the south and the
 north of Germany, leaving the older, desilusined generations behind. That way
 Eastern Germany becomes even less interesting for western investors and even
 more open to populist ideas.  But if ,like argued above, the main cause of
 eastern German populism is the failed capitalist policies and the free market,
 why do so many people gather around right wing populist parties instead of left
 wing parties? Here it is important to keep in mind that the most of the older
 Eastern Germans suffered through fifty years of communist dictatorship.
 Although socialist parties still do have strongholds in the east, the majority
 of people is still strictly adverse to and left ideas. Accordingly they gather
 around the next best solution, the AFD, that promises to ‘free’ them of
 Migrants, reinstates social equality between west and east and give them a
 sense of belonging.  


 ## Conclusion

 To conclude and answer the question of whether or not populism is purely caused
 by globalisation, we have laid out the factors that have fueled populistic
 movements and views in either, the USA or Germany. After having identified the
 sources of populism in both countries, the fact of both origins being of
 different nature, has already disproved the hypothesis. In Germany, populistic
 views have been emerging due to historic and geographical discrepancies and the
 migration, which was conflict caused. The lower economic stand of the east,
 combined with the massive inflow of immigrant in the recent years, labeled
 *"the migration crisis"*, and the resulting shift of labour, especially in the
 eastern regions, results in the right-wing political parties to adhere power.
 The left was unlikely to be chosen as populistic representation, as the
 historic communism gives a rejecting bias towards left-wing politics. In the
 USA however, most populistic views have been fueled by forces originating from
 globalisation. The pressure of international trade exerted by countries like
 China threaten the States' position, and migration, which in contrast to
 Germany is caused by the want for better economic circumstances and living
 standard, much less due to conflict. The fear of terrorism in the USA fuels
 the fear of migration to their country by people groups of certain cultures or
 backgrounds, globalisation gives more power into the hands of those they fear,
 while feeling their country is loosing its sovereignty. This is cause for
 political populism to arise in such extend. In turn, that means, that populism
 in these two countries is caused by different factor origins. One of those
 factors for the USA is globalisation, thus it can be said that globalisation is
 a partial factor causing populism. In Germany, globalisation is much less of a
 direct factor as in the USA. The majority of populism in the states is in fact
 caused by globalisation, and that in a rather direct way, where as in Germany
 it is not. Globalisation though is a big factor when considering how today's
 and past circumstances have developed.  Globalisation is the cause for many
 mentioned factors causing populism. Without globalisation, there wouldn't be
 much of a east-west discrepancy. Considering, that globalisation is not
 phenomenon that has been around for only a decade or two, but much longer, thus
 having been around when the circumstances causing populism nowadays in Germany,
 were instantiated. There are, as mentioned above, many reasons directly or
 indirectly being responsible for causing populism in either country,
 globalisation being only one of many. 
