---
layout: post
title: "Fixed rates"
description:
authors: Ty_Yiu
date: 2018-11-26
categories: Uni ECN375
---

## Pressure on fix rates

- Deficit nations experience downward pressure
- Lower exchange rates implications for exporters (clashes with mercantilism)
- National perception of fixed rate
- Reserves/liquidity considerations (raise interest rates for liquidty, damaging
  own currency, trade-off solution)
  
A floating exchange rate seems as it creates balance by being balanced. Because
money is leaving the economy, currency exchange takes place, the currency gets
stronger and exports get more expensive, while imports turn cheaper. This is how
a floating rate should balance out surpluses/deficits among nations. The
evidence of chronic surpluses/deficits/debts raises the questions of
effectiveness of floating exchange rates. Money flows exabercate trade
imbalances while capital flows entrench polarisation. Because there is less
money, interest go up, due to smaller supply. Making it harder for domestic
investment etc. Foreign direct investment will increase, as relatively,
investments become cheaper using foreign currency. The problem in trade will
furthen debt.

## Chronic adjustment remedies

Buying your own money! If that doesnt stop it, stop the flow of money, stop
import buying.  A liberalist would prefer Deflation over protectionism. Their
Laissez-faire approach leaves not much room for contingency regarding adjustment
remedies.

- Gold standard C19
- Disruption imbalances and crisis 1914-1944 (creation of new system for
  post-war times)
- Bretton Woods fixed rate and dollar-gold standard 1944-1971
- End of Bretton Woods and Globalisation - A new era of disorder 1971-NOW

Gold supplies and paper money supplies have to be balanced. Every time theres a
deficit, you have to deflate the economy, lower prices and less activity.
Meaning less income for business, less wages, higher unemployment. The
poor/people on fixed income suffer most.


