---
layout: post
title: 'Revamping London Heathrow Airport'
subtitle: 'With the use of neuroscience knowledge and research tools to better
           understand consumer responses to their experience and relief identified pain
           points'
date: 2019-06-13
author: Ty Yiu
documentclass: article
toc: true
header-includes: |
    \usepackage{caption}
    \usepackage{subcaption}
---

\begin{abstract}
Taking into account how the brain works, processes and retains information is
the difference between traditional marketing and neuromarketing. Today, The
focus is on emotional information, experiences that induce more positive
emotions and reinforcement of associations made and tied to the brand.
Neuromarketing enables the creation of a better customer experience, as it
delivers usable and measurable responses to circumstances that are wished to be
maximised. Identifying pain points, that cause negative emotional, associative
and physiological responses can then be adequately treated and measured for
successive implementation of change. To have the greatest impact upon maximising
the positive association of stay, problems of highest mutuality among travelers
are under observation.
\end{abstract}

\pagebreak
\pagebreak

The consumer brain is often very irrational and the underlying processes often
unconscious and outside of our control. Thus, Neuromarketing tools can be
utilised to improve experiences by exploiting those irrational and unconscious
processes. That is why these tools can be very powerful, henceforth require ethical
considerations regarding intention. 

## A typical scenario

Imaginary, follow a common person's journey through the airport to understand why
change is needed. Imagining the average traveller is done to maximise the number
of people affected by the changes. 

The average user is a for leisure travelling individual, middle aged. (Facts and
figures | Heathrow . (2019)) 
It is Friday afternoon and he will be taking the *Piccadilly* tube line to
reach the airport like most. This makes his arrival quite easy and
predictable. He added a thirty minute buffer to his travel time within the
airport as always and bag drop went over quickly as he flies can do that on his
own at one of the numerous automated terminals. The stress only really starts at
the airport where security check commences. As he flew many times, this may be
less stressful for him and he is adequately prepared by having pre-sealed all
his liquids. The queue though is much longer than he anticipated, which made
sense as he realises that the next Monday is a bank holiday, which is why there
are much more travelers. As he gets out the other side, rather late for his
flight, not being able anymore to get a quick snack as planned, he realises that
he didn't put in his contacts this morning and left his backup glasses in his
luggage. Not being able to identify where he needs to go without coming really
close to the info panels or signs illustrating the directions, he looses a lot
of time, which induces quite a bit of stress. He never flies Heathrow, always
Gatwick, which is why he doesn't know the layout. For five minutes he walks into
the wrong direction because he read the wrong gate number as a result of
slipping the line, which now makes him anxious as soon as he realises, because
now the time it takes to get to his gate is unclear. He begins to steadily
increase his pace just to make it half wet of sweat to the gate, which hasn't
even opened for boarding, because it is delayed, which he didn't realise in all
his efforts. 

## Pain Points & Problems

Improving the customers journey going through Heathrow airport can be done by
minimising factors that induce pain during the stay. These problems can be
identified with and treated utilising neuromarketing tools to create intangible
but measurable value. Another good way of identifying problems, is to consider
negative associations of past experiences. To make decisions about how to treat
the pain the root cause needs to be identified, which caused the experience to
be associated negatively. 

Measuring these pain points and the effectiveness of the proposed solutions
should be done using neuromarketing tools instead of traditional tools due to
inference, biases and other attributed problems such as *"strategic answering"*
or *faulty introspection"*. Verification of results should be done using
combinations of implicit measurements of neuromarketing tools to strengthen a
thesis about the cause of a physiological response. 
The physiological response(s) such as facial coding, wording or galvanic skin
response can have multiple sources of origin, thus it is desired to proof that
every other theory of source of origin seems so unreasonable to as the thesis is
only sensible to accept.

### Stress

Given that Heathrow is the UK's busiest airport by passenger traffic, one of the
most relevant pains during the stay is stress. Stress is an emotion. It is
stimulus related and triggers bodily/physiological responses. Thus, it has
measurable values that can be observed for severity. Stress itself though, is
not a root-cause that can be treated by itself, it is a symptom, merely a cause
of a perceived stimuli. 

#### Time pressure

Time pressure is probably the most dominant stressor for travellers. Beginning
at the trip planning process, increasing as the journey to the airplane
progresses and declining as soon as in the seat, if not anxious of flying. This
stressor is only relevant to Heathrow airport, if it can effectively contribute
to reducing the stress and/or identify circumstances in which the airport design
may be a contributing factors towards stress. Adrenaline is the neurotransmitter
contributed to stress regulation, thus it's presence should be minimised during
the travel through or stay at the airport. The major contribution towards
time pressure originating from airports come from *travel time* and *ease of
navigation*. Travel time in itself can mostly be predicted given that transport
is achieved via train, but also includes situations where the variable traveller
count at the airport could significantly increase time taken at security control
or passport inspection (e.g. Christmas). 

**Travel Time's** catalysing effect on time-pressure and consequently stress can
be reduced by reducing it's variability, meaning steadier progression throughout
the airport. This also includes queueing and it's significant stress effects due
to it's unpredictability. The unpredictability seems to be the root-cause for
time-pressure based travel time stress.
The perception of why stress increases so much, is because we see many people in a
queue, don't know how long it will exactly take and whether the unpredictable
hold up causes us to miss the flight. The reason of why on the other hand, is
that we have no control over the situation and are thus subject to other
people's capabilities, who we not trust due to not knowing them.

**Ease of navigation** on the other hand is much more variable and includes how
easy it is for travellers to navigate the airport, not regarding finding
information on where to go, but optimising the physical design to ease
navigation, the layout. The *parietal lobe* is relevant for the ease of
navigation due to it being responsible for spatial processing and navigation
based on input from the occipital lobe, which processes visual stimuli. The
temporal lobe adds visual recognition via memory access ability to the
capabilities. These three brain regions in conjunction allow the recognition of
spatial patterns and use system one's speed of pattern recognition and
*environment scanning*. Bringing the process of recognising pathways and
destinations closer to an easier, more automatic and system 1 heavy type,
greatly increases ease of navigation and consequently reduces stress.

#### Top-down attention success

Top-down attention success describes the rate of success of finding information
that is being looked for within a given stimuli. Compared to bottom-up
attention, which aims at analysing what draws attention within a stimuli, it is
essential to know whether information important to the traveller is easy to be
found. It happens much too often that stimuli that strongly draw attention avert
the collection of relevant information. With advertising and information having
to share the same physical space, it is as well too often seen that what is
relevant is lost in *a sea of information*. Have a look at the following
pictures, depicting two designs for the winner card, of the 2017 *Oscar's*.

![The old Oscars winner card design](./assets/oscars.jpeg){width=50%} 
![The revamped Oscars winner card design ](./assets/oscars1.jpeg){width=50%}
\begin{figure}[!h]
\begin{subfigure}[t]{0.5\textwidth}
\caption{The old and terribly bad Oscars winner card design}
\end{subfigure}
\hfill
\begin{subfigure}[t]{0.5\textwidth}
\caption{The \textit{revamped} Oscars winner card design} 
\end{subfigure}
\caption{A comparison between the visual presentation on a Oscars winner card}
\end{figure}

As easily to identify, the revamped design only changes that there is a greater
emphasis on the essential information, the category of the Oscar to be received.
This subtle change could now be given value after having measured the implicit
factors with the new version and compared it to the old design. The *pain* is
measurable and thus the relief of it thanks to a less negative experience is the
change's intrinsic value. 
Above example is often seen in real life, where advertising and commercial
information display like merchandising is more dominant and intentionally so
than to the traveller relevant. Often this can be seen by relevant and
commercial information sharing the same *space*, such as a wall or being in
close proximity to each other. Such placement/positioning confuses and creates
importance for unimportant stimuli, simply because they're positioned close to
relevant information.

#### Information, panels & signs

In contrast to the above mentioned top-down attention success, this is different
in the sense of how the actual information is presented, in isolation of sorts.
The problem with those signs is that they are super hard to read and cram too
much information onto small space, so that utilisation of white-space, size and
form become useless. 
For Heathrow, a typical *departures* info panel would look like this:

![London Heathrow info panel](http://bit.ly/2ZuwLsh)

Tiny typography, repetitive patterns and little use of iconography do not ease
the absorption of relevant information. 
The Dorsal stream is, utilising the occipital lobe, responsible for visual
processing cannot grasp visual stimulation as easy as it could be. Making the
absorption of important information a less system two intensive process reduces
stress immensely. Important information such as warnings or urgent announcements
are normally only distributed via spoken announcements, those impaired or
unaware may miss very much relevant information. 

## Proposed Solutions 

### Stress

Traditional methods would likely to be surveying past travellers about their
experience and associated stress, which is not a good measure, given that we
know about inference, socially desirable and strategic answering. The proper way
to conduct research about actual stress levels rising during the progression
through the airport are *hypothalamus'* activated physiological body responses,
such as galvanic skin response, heart-rate changes, pupil dilation or similar.
These reactions are triggered unconsciously and cannot easily be controlled
consciously and are thus the best option for measuring stress values.

There are many ways to reduce stress and the main focus is on by the airport
created and at the airport experienced stress, but general stress reduction
methods can support such undertaking. *GABA* neurotransmitter release induces
calmness, counteracting stress's *adrenaline* effects. Many unrelated measures
such as reducing sound or increase natural presence (plants, greenery) to reduce
stimulation and thus stimuli to interpret for the brain, will increase the
positive emotional association with the airport. 

#### Travel Time

As most arrival originates from public transport and is thus quite predictable,
the focus is on reducing the travel time and stress induced during it for a
better experience. 

If we again consider above mentioned *typical scenario*, improving these
symptoms can either be done by taking away the *ambiguity* of duration,
automation (electronic passport control is a great start) and/or giving the
traveller the feeling of maintaining control. Having **more frequent, but less
dense** security checks, allow the traveller to choose more freely based on
self-perceived/predicted time of duration at each point of entry.  Ambiguity of
duration can be reduced by implementing AI to predict duration and digital
technology to **distribute duration estimates**. In a concrete sense, this
could be implemented by having a webpage or app section in which the estimated
time for each queuing point is visible before arrival at the airport, so that
the feeling of choice is induced.  This doesn't actually improve security
checks, but minimises the stress experienced during these elements of the
airport.

#### Ease of navigation

The spatial layout and design of the airport is incredibly important for the
factors stress and positive experience. Optimising the layout should go in hand
with a redesign of information visualisation and commercial space utilisation,
not only reducing stress in navigating, but also increasing recognisability and
distinct separation of relevant information, design and marketing. 
Concretely, this idea is to be realised by integrating more open design, so that
pathways seem less hidden or adapting angles of corners so that they are easily
to gaze through to find a destination/path in question easier. Personally, I
guess a recurring radial-centric design would result in a much better layout for
the airport than a procedural addition of rectangles forming a structure.

#### Top-down attention success

Giving travellers the information they need when, they need it is probably 
one of the most important jobs of the airport. The premise is distinct
separation of relevant and irrelevant information, where relevant information is
following constant design rules to be easily recognised and held apart from
marketing content. The job is to improve the experience of the overall stay at the
airport, not the optimisation of sales of within positioned commercial
facilities. 

Eye tracking can be used to validate effectiveness of improvements made to the
design of the space and whether the traveller can find what he wants. Time to
first fixation, and gaze can be used for knowing how long and at what a
traveller looks at and whether the distinction between relevant and irrelevant
information is close to instantaneous. 

#### Information, panels & signs

Above mentioned information distribution at airports is generally very poor and
channels need to be increased to effectively create a better experience, by
taking away the stress of the traveller, that he might miss an announcement, may
not be up-to-date with his flight information or ambiguity of travel time.

The below shows the proposed alterations to existing information panels
throughout the airport by improving upon ease of recognition of relevant
information.  

![Proposed info panel design changes](./assets/better_info_sign.png)

As also shown in the illustration itself, several aspects have been changed to
ease the recognition of relevant information. Knowledge from what draws
attention, acquired from bottom-down attention eye tracking on airport grounds
and information panels, has been used to optimise placement and presentation of
relevant information as there were disparities between what draws attention and
what is relevant. 

Again, Eye tracking software can be used to measure the differences in
gaze, time to fixations and recurring fixations to evaluate the changes'
effectiveness. Galvanic skin response can also be used this time, as the changes
experienced can be easily tracked to the changes made and ambiguity about
causality of the changes in bodily responses can be minimised. 

The changes could start at delivering informative announcements directly to
traveller's phones instead of only announcing them auditive. Predictions made by
AI can be used to estimate time estimates for queues and other travel aspects,
such as people at a given machine or checkpoint. 

The airport could use **augmented reality** to better view the information above
mentioned, extremely increasing the amount of relevant content for the user, if
so programmed to. This could concretely be implemented by a companion app that
overlays the path to the gate over the camera view of the smartphone. To better
envision what is meant, below placed is a view of Google Maps Augmented Reality
Mode, that does just the above described. 

![Google Maps AR Mode](https://tcrn.ch/2IjNOaA)

Exact tracking of travellers can be done using Bluetooth beacons and improved
*pathfinding* and *around-me* recommendations can be made. A lot of stress is
induced by the traveller not knowing whether the plane is still ready for
boarding or if the doors already closed. Live and real time communication
between the travellers and airport systems could provide a much better
experience for the traveller, while simultaneously increasing insight about what
is going on within the airport, as security issues are a prominent stressor for
some airports, especially in this time of age. 
The traveller could receive real time updates about his flight, when it landed,
when boarding opens, where the gate is, how long until boarding opens, how long
until takeoff or even if there are many people already at the gate waiting to
enter the plane. The private information of the user doesn't need to be known,
which is important, but all mentioned features are available without it, the
proximity to the beacon doesn't reveal any information other than device
details.

### Conclusion

There are many ways to improve the stay at an airport. The proposed solutions
made are based upon the fact of having minimal interference with ongoing
business, offering *neuromarketing* measurable and impactful changes, while
improving on shortcomings of the existing airport rather than coming up with a
completely new structure.

Traditional tools cannot be used for effective and knowingly unbiased emotional
analysis regarding associations to London Heathrow Airport, thus
*neuromarketing* tools are used on identified *pain points*, problem situations
that have similar root-causes, that can be measured in response via mentioned
tools.

The common pain for many travellers is *stress* and has thus become subject of
major focus. *Neuromarketing* tools can measure changes in stress responses via
physiological responses such as heart-rate, pupil dilation or galvanic skin
response. These unconsciously occurring bodily reactions are the reason why the
experience of the stay at Heathrow airport can be optimised by changing small
aspects instead of the whole thing.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### References

Why Typography Matters - Especially At the Oscars. (2017). freeCodeCamp.org
News. Retrieved 12 June 2019, from [here](http://bit.ly/31rusIp)

Lewis, D. (2007). Heathrow stress 'equal to facing riots' . Telegraph.co.uk.
Retrieved 14 June 2019, from [here](http://bit.ly/2ZpYPx4)

Facts and figures | Heathrow . (2019). Heathrow.com. Retrieved 16 June 2019,
from [here](http://bit.ly/2Zp8svV)

iBeacon - Apple Developer. (2019). Developer.apple.com. Retrieved 16 June 2019,
from https://developer.apple.com/ibeacon/

