Argumentation
=============

An argument can be defined as a:

:   form of reasoning that attempts to establish the truth of one claim
    (called a conclusion) based on the assumed truth of the evidence in
    other claims (called premises) provided to support the conclusion.

Can I have a counter example - a strong argument

If you have a valid argument, assuming the premise to be true, there is
no other possible solution than the conclusion

An argument has three important characteristics or features, in that it:

-   is a form of reasoning;

-   is comprised of claims (sometimes also called statements or
    assertions);

-   aims at establishing a conclusion (i.e., one claim)

-   based on evidence (provided by other claims called premises).

The Structure of an Argument
============================

Premise 1.
----------

When I recently visited the Computer Science Department at the
University of Hiroshima I noticed that graduate students and professors
there were field testing a new computer chip, whose code name is Chip X.

Premise 2.
----------

I have a copy of the design specifications for Chip X, which shows that
it will be several times faster than any chip currently available in the
UK.

Premise 3.
----------

Lee Smith, a mutual colleague of ours who was recently an exchange
student in the computer science program at the University of Hiroshima
and who participated in the field testing of Chip X, will corroborate my
account.

Conclusion.
-----------

Chip X is currently being developed in Japan.

Argument Structure vs. Argument Strength
========================================

Not all arguments are strong -- i.e., not all arguments succeed in
establishing their conclusions. Any form of reasoning will qualify as an
argument if it satisfies the three conditions we specified above.
Analyze the following argument and ask yourself whether it is a strong
argument -- i.e., does it establish its conclusion?

Analyze the following argument:
-------------------------------

### Conclusion:

Those who use the Internet should not expect to retain any personal
privacy while online.

### Premise:

The Internet is in public space.

Is this argument strong -- i.e., does it succeed in establishing its
conclusion?

Constructing an Argument in Ordinary Language (Prose)
=====================================================

Consider the following argument that is expressed in prose (or
narrative) form:

We must build a national missile defense system (NMD) because without
such a system we are vulnerable to nuclear attacks from rogue nations
that might arise in the future. Additionally, several engineers and
computer scientists have testified that they can design a
computer-guided missile defense system that is effective, safe and
reliable. Furthermore, it is our obligation as British to take whatever
measures we can to protect the safety of our citizens.

Converting an Argument from Prose into "Standard Form"
------------------------------------------------------

### Premise 1.

Without the new National Missile Defense System, the UK is vulnerable to
nuclear attacks in the future from \"rogue nations.

### Premise 2.

Computer scientists and engineers have testified that they can design a
computerguided missile defense system that is both safe and reliable.

### Premise 3.

The UK. must do whatever is necessary to preserve the military defense
of the nation and the safety of its citizens.

### Conclusion.

Therefore, the UK should build the new National Missile Defense System.

Argument Strength: Valid vs. Invalid Arguments
==============================================

Is the preceding argument involving the new National Missile Defense
(NMD) system a strong argument (i.e., is it valid)? Assume that the
premises in the argument are true, does the conclusion necessary follow
from them? Can you imagine a counterexample to the argument?

Valid and Invalid Arguments The Counterexample Strategy
-------------------------------------------------------

Because you can imagine a counterexample to the NMD argument, it is
invalid. Note that all of the premises in that argument can be assumed
true, while the argument's conclusion could still be imagined to be
false. However, we could revise or reconstruct the NMD argument by
adding another premise.

The NMD Argument Revised
------------------------

### Premise 1.

Without the new National Missile Defense System, the UK is vulnerable to
nuclear attacks in the future from \"rogue nations.

### Premise 2.

Computer scientists and engineers have testified before Congress that
they can design a computer-guided missile defense system that is both
safe and reliable.

### Premise 3.

The UK must do whatever is necessary to preserve the military defense of
the nation and the safety of its citizens.

### Premise 4.

The national missile defense system is necessary to preserve the defense
and safety of the UK and its citizens.

### Conclusion.

Therefore, the UK should build the new National Missile Defense System.

Is the revised argument for NMD a valid argument? Can you imagine a
counterexample to it? If the premises are assumed true, the conclusion
must be true, i.e., no counterexample is possible. So, the (revised)
argument is valid.

The Form of a Valid Argument
============================

A valid argument is valid solely in virtue of its logical form, not its
content.

An example of a valid logical form is:
--------------------------------------

### PREMISE 1.

Every A is a B.

### PREMISE 2.

C is an A.

### CONCLUSION.

C is a B.

No matter what values are substituted for A, B, and C, the argument form
is always valid.

Valid and Invalid Arguments Arguments
=====================================

Valid

:   The assumed truth of the premises is sufficient to guarantee the
    conclusion.

Invalid

:   Premises (even when true) do not guarantee the conclusion.

Valid Arguments that are not Sound

:   An argument can be valid (in virtue of its logical form), but still
    not succeed in accomplishing its task. For example, one or more of
    the (valid) argument's premises might not be true in the actual
    world. In this case the argument would still be valid, but it would
    not be sound.

Sound and Unsound Arguments
===========================

*For an argument to be sound, it must be:* Valid (i.e., the assumed
truth of the premises would guarantee the truth of the argument's
conclusion); The (valid) argument's premises must also be true in the
actual world.

Arguments that are Valid and Unsound
------------------------------------

*The following argument is valid, but unsound:*

### PREMISE 1.

People who own iMac computers are smarter than those who own PCs.

### PREMISE 2.

My roommate owns an iMac computer.

### PREMISE 3.

I own a PC.

### CONCLUSION.

My roommate is smarter than me.

Sound Arguments
---------------

Sound arguments are very rare. The following argument is sound:

### PREMISE 1.

CEOs of major computer corporations are high-school graduates.

### PREMISE 2.

Bill Gates was the CEO of a major computer corporation.

### CONCLUSION.

Bill Gates is a high-school graduate.

-   Valid Arguments

    -   Sound

    -   Unsound


-   All the premises are true.

-   At least one premise is false.

Invalid Arguments: Inductive vs. Fallacious Reasoning
=====================================================

An argument is invalid if you can give one counterexample to the
argument. We saw that a counterexample is:

A possible case where the premises can be assumed to be true while, at
the same time, the conclusion could be false (Nolt).

*Invalid arguments will be either:*

inductive, fallacious.

The following argument is invalid because a counter example is possible:
------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PREMISE 1.

All CEOs of major United States computer corporations have been United
States citizens.

### PREMISE 2.

Bill Gates is a United States citizen.

### CONCLUSION.

Bill Gates has been a CEO of a major computer corporation in the U.S.

Inductive Arguments
===================

An argument is inductive when:
------------------------------

The conclusion would likely be true when the premises of the argument
are assumed to be true.

Even though a counterexample to an inductive argument is possible, the
argument's conclusion would likely be true in the majority of cases
where the premises are assumed true.

The following is an example of an inductive argument:
-----------------------------------------------------

### PREMISE 1.

Most CEOs of computer corporations are college graduates.

### PREMISE 2.

Steve Ballmer is the CEO of Microsoft, a computer corporation.

### CONCLUSION.

Steve Ballmer is a college graduate.

Fallacious Arguments
====================

An argument is fallacious when:

:   The argument's conclusion would not likely follow from its premises,
    even when all of the premises are assumed true.

Multiple counterexamples to a fallacious argument can be provided.

The following is an example of a fallacious argument:
-----------------------------------------------------

### PREMISE 1.

Ten percent of people who own iPods also own iMac computers.

### PREMISE 2.

My roommate currently owns an iPod.

### CONCLUSION.

My roommate also owns an iMac computer.

Invalid Arguments

-   Inductive

-   Conclusion likely follows from assuming the truth of the premises.

-   Fallacious

-   Conclusion does not likely follow from assuming the truth of the
    premises.

-   A Comprehensive Scheme for Viewing Argument Strength Arguments

-   Valid

-   Unsound

-   Weak Arguments

-   Invalid

-   Sound

-   Inductive

-   Strong Arguments

-   Fallacious

-   Weak Arguments

Seven-Step Strategy for Evaluating
==================================

Arguments I: Steps 1-4
======================

### Step 1.

Convert the argument into standard form. (List the premises first,
followed by the conclusion.)

### Step 2.

Test the argument for its reasoning strength to see whether it is valid
or invalid. (Assume the premises to be true, and ask yourself whether
the conclusion must also be true when those premises are assumed true.
Is a counterexample to the argument possible?)

### Step 3.

Is the argument valid? If yes, go to Step 4. If no, go to Step 5.

### Step 4.

Is the (valid) argument also sound? That is, are the premises true in
the actual world?

### 4a.

If the argument is valid and if all of the premises are true in the
actual world, then the argument is also sound. (To determine
truth-values for statements, see Appendix E.)

### 4b.

If the argument is valid, but one or more premises can be shown to be
either false or not capable of being verified in the actual world, then
argument is unsound.

### Step 5.

Is the (invalid) argument inductive or fallacious? (How likely will the
conclusion be true when the premises are assumed true?)

### 5a.

If the conclusion would likely be true because the premises are assumed
true, the argument is inductive.

### 5b.

If the conclusion would not likely be true even when the premises are
assumed true, the argument is fallacious. (Keep in mind that a
fallacious argument can be made up of Individual claims that are
themselves true in the actual world.)

### Step 6.

Determine whether the premises in your argument are either true or
false.

### Step 7.

Make an overall assessment of the argument. That is, describe the
argument's strength of reasoning in conjunction with the truth
conditions of the argument's premises. For example, is the argument
inductive with all true premises? Is it inductive with some false
premises? Is it fallacious with a mixture of true and false premises,
and so forth?

Remember that an inductive argument with premises that are all true is
stronger than a valid argument with one or more false premises.)

Scenario
========

You are contemplating downloading a software application that is
available on a Web site called Sharester, a peer-to-peer (P2P) site set
up for file sharing. Sharester is not officially designated as a "pirate
site" because it provides users mainly with access to (freely available)
open-source software applications. However, the site also enables users
to download a few proprietary (or copyrighted) software programs. It
turns out that the particular software application you are interested in
downloading is proprietary, and there is no reason to believe that the
copyright holder of that application has authorized its being freely
downloaded by users on this P2P site. You want to download this
application for personal use (only) but you are conflicted about what to
do, and you discuss your concerns with a good friend. Your friend tries
to convince you not to download the proprietary software program, using
the following rationale: Downloading proprietary software (without
permission from the copyright holder) is identical to stealing physical
property. Stealing physical property is morally wrong. Therefore,
downloading proprietary so5ware (without permission) is morally wrong.

Is the reasoning process used by your friend a good one? How do we
determine that? Apply the 7 step strategy.

Scenario 2
==========

Apply the seven-step strategy to evaluate the argument in the following
scenario:

A major associa0on represen0ng the music industry in the United States
has determined that 4,000 copies of a new album featuring a popular rock
group, called DUO, had been illegally downloaded last month. The cost of
this album for those who elect to download it legally from online music
stores is \$10 per copy. So the association concludes that the music
company that holds the copyright to this album lost \$40,000 dollars in
revenue last month (on that album alone).

Scenario 3
==========

Determine whether the strength of reasoning used in the argument in the
following scenario is valid or invalid. If it is invalid, does it commit
any fallacies?

You are engaged in an intense discussion with your friend, Bill, who
works in the IT department at your university. Bill complains that many
students are using P2P (peer-to-peer) file-sharing applications on the
university's network to download excessive amounts of unauthorized
copyrighted material. He also claims that the most executive solution to
this problem would be to disable student access to all (existing) P2P
sites and to prevent students at your institution from se\]ng up their
own P2P sites for any reason whatsoever (even to include noncopyrighted
material). You convey to Bill your belief that this measure is too
drastic. However, Bill argues that the only way to eliminate
unauthorized file sharing among students at your institution is to
disable access to all P2P so5ware on the university's network.
