== The Runaway Trolley: A Classic Moral Dilemma ==

Imagine that you are driving a trolley and that all of a sudden you realize that the trolley’s brake system has failed.

Further imagine that approximately 80 meters ahead of you on the trolley track (a short distance from the trolley’s staHon) five crew men are working on a secHon of the track on which your trolley is traveling.

You realize that you cannot stop the trolley and that you will probably not be able to prevent the deaths of the five workers.

But then you suddenly realize that you could “throw a switch” that would cause the trolley to go on to a different track.

You also happen to noHce that one person is working on that track.

You then realize that if you do nothing, five people will likely die, where as if you engage the switch to change tracks, only one person would likely die 

-- What would you do in this situaton? 

---------------------

Consider a variaton of this dilemma, which also involves a runaway trolley, but this Hme you are a spectator.

Imagine that you are standing on a bridge overlooking the track on which a runaway trolley is traveling.

You observe that the trolley is heading for the staHon where there are many people gathered outside.

Standing next to you on the bridge is a very large and obese person (weighing approximately 500 pounds), who is leaning forward over the rail of the bridge to view the runaway trolley.

You realize that if you gently pushed the obese person forward as the trolley approaches, he would fall off the bridge and land in front of the trolley; the impact would be sufficient to stop the trolley.

Thus you could save the lives of many people who otherwise would die.

Would you be willing to push the obese person off the bridge?

-- If not, why not? What has changed in the two scenarios? 

-----------------------

Would you sacrifice one person to save five? - _Eleanor Nelsen_ 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yg16u_bzjPE 

