
---
layout: post
title: "Individual Report"
date: 2018-12-03
authors: Ty_Yiu
---


> Should we abandon privacy online? Maximise human happiness vs Maximise human
safety. Is the freedom to send an encrypted text message essential? How about
the right to keep our browsing history private? What is the sweet spot between
our need to be left alone and our desire to keep potential criminals from
communicating in secret?

> In an age where fear of terrorism is high in the public consciousness,
governments are likely to err on the side of safety.The downsides are not
immediately obvious. After all, you might think you have nothing to hide. But
most of us have perfectly legal secrets we’d rather someone else didn’t see. And
although the chances of the authorities turning up to take you away in a black
SUV on the basis of your WhatsApp messages are small in free societies, the
chances of insurance companies raising your premiums are not.

*Human safety vs human hapiness, are they incompatible?* Privacy contributes
towards happiness as well as safety, contingent on the circumstance. Having your
digital diary in the most recent wiki-leaks post is certainly contributing more
towards personal happiness than personal safety. The ability of your stalker to
use that information to get your whereabouts and inform himself about your
routine is clearly contributing towards personal safety. The question that
arises from the above, is whether or not safety is a sub-set of happiness, given
that one would probably not be happy in a situation such as being held captive. 
Considering that, one could argue that human safety is a consequence or a
mutation. Privacy online seems to oppose these concepts in certain cases. As
mentioned in the *more details* section, there are cases in which privacy needs
to be sacrificed for security, such as the mentioned search for a criminal.
These technologies available to our disposal are wide range and super efficient.
Leveraging these enables mind-bobbling cross-referencing techniques and big data
analysis for observing the general public. The problem arising is, that human
inconsistency leads to e.g. the passing along of one citizen's photos within the
body and offices of governmental intelligence agencies or even worse becoming
public because of being found hilarious by those intelligence officers. A
scenario like this is not unbelievable and shocking, but not irregular. Fact is,
there is no control to be exercised by individuals. That is not necessarily the
problem, considering that government regulation could ensure the protection of
individual's data differently. The encryption of messages does lie within this
domain. The encrypted communication is a vital part of online privacy. The
post-secrecy law applying to the physical voyage of letters should apply in the
online realm. The security issues related to online communication should be
treated the same as the communication within the real world. Communication is an
essential part of democracy, especially anonymous communication. The need for
that is fulfilled in the physical realm and must be obeyed in the online
dimension. Without anonymous communication and the secure transfer of messages,
the web will not be democratic, far away from being able to be integrated into
democratic processes. Or at least that's how it should be. Momentarily, the
mentioned dilemma between being left alone and keeping criminals from
communicating does not leave many options but to sacrifice privacy for security.
Though do technologies nowadays enable us to blur the difference between full
anonymity and anonymity. What's meant with that, is the fact that search
keywords can be utilised to find communicating criminals. This is already being
done today, combine the words Plane, Bomb, Al-Qaida etc. in an email and send
it. You'll definitely get checked out by intelligence agencies. These systems
now only have to be made perfect to such an extent, that they can replace human
checking. Privacy is vital for humans, to an extent. People behave better when
being watched, but they shouldn't be watched all the time. In some cases we
cannot protect ourselves from being watched, referring to CCTV, airport
security, etc. Some system you cannot legally hide from, some catch your picture
by *coincidence*. The book *The Circle* by *Dave Eggers* is a really good
dystopian representation of surveillance, in a new and distinctively different
way than for example *George Orwell's 1984*. Transparency was key aspect in the
storyline for the book. Politicians intentionally made their careers transparent
by live-streaming every working hour. That appealed to the democratic folk as
they felt more sure about the processes behind the curtain of politics. The book
lacked the regulation by the government, the want by the people for transparency
was there and they willingly wanted to adopt technology that would sacrifice
privacy. All scenario in the book involved professional careers, not private
life. There is a senior citizenship that had their life be made transparent for
safety, in the sense of eliminating the possibility of not having help when an
accident occurs, such as a stroke or a fall. The thought of having cameras in
your home is not too ridiculous, but the thought of having someone watch you. Is
a computer watching you the same as a person watching you? Knowing that the
system only acts upon certain actions and disregards other actions.
Fragmentation of data does not necessarily mean the loss of information. The
transparency of firms and governments that will employ such measures or offer
such products is key. Scandals like the apparent recent china hardware hack, in
which super-micro computers, so Bloomberg, embedded a separate chip on-top of
sold chips, to enable communication and manipulation of said chips. That is one
of the situations that will hinder any progress on the topic of online privacy.
The combined efforts will have to overthrow criminal activities, which can only
be achieved by working together with fair, transparent enough but still private
enough regulations/efforts. The likelihood of criminals to collaborate will sink
and the feeling of safety increase. The feeling of not having a chance will
eventually lead to the ability to restore privacy in a better circumstance. So
the theory. Privacy is a consequence of safety in this concept. As safety will
be prioritised over privacy, enforced by government and accepted by the
population. The best way to restore privacy is to eliminate the need of having
to sacrifice privacy for safety. Thus, making the world a safer place means
making the world more able to sustain privacy. Therefore, ultimately regulation
and public perception/feelings/sentiment decide the fate of privacy. 


## Opening Statement

Online privacy cannot be abandoned, it is the stepping stone towards a future,
either future. The need of privacy for democracy hinders the abandonment.

Security Vs. Privacy, the trade-off in the modern world. The two should not be
regarded as mutually exclusive, but as symptoms of the circumstance of society.

The online realm legislation needs adaptation, and special cases, based on the
current legislation of the physical realm.

Human inconsistency leads to the sacrifice of privacy. Computer accuracy and
consistency will resolve issues. 

The control over data has to be given back to the creators, enabling democratic
information exchange.

Privacy is vital for humans, to an extent. People behave better when being
watched, though they shouldn't be watched all the time.

Transparency may be key in future politics and career management. Observations
will transform the labour market to be performance based instead of time based. 

International scandals like the Bloomberg reported china hardware hack hinder
the development and progression of privacy.
Further legislation is needed and transparent cooperation between firms and
government is essential.


