---
layout: post
title: "Should we abandon privacy online?"
date: 2018-12-03
author: Ty Yiu, Daniel Harkjaer, Ilya Bezarshvili, Blake Denis
---

Online Privacy is not a translation of privacy, it is mutated, formed by unfit
regulation and does not conform with expectations of privacy anymore. The rising
population, the inefficiency of screening on national level, the social fear
induced by society and spread by online communities, these aspects in
conjunction are an existential thread. Hacking, hate speech, online bullying,
these are all symptoms of an existing illness, the belief of there being no way
of being held responsible or reliable, ultimately leading to radicalization. To
counter-act and ensure safety for the population of a nation, it is vital to
decrease individual's online privacy to benefit the greater good. The least bad
choice, reducing privacy may even be the best choice in this matter. Options are
running out. The cybersphere has proven to not be a place of autarky and
self-regulation, intervention is required to dampen further existential
threats. The past incidences revolving around issues of privacy, including the
explicit statement of having failed building the internet as intended by the
inventor of the world wide web, is the ultimate argument against our failed
attempt of online privacy. Online privacy is already dead, the question we face
is how we treat digital privacy, ongoing, considering our failures. Our only
hope for a safe, open, inviting and social web relies on abandoning online
privacy as we know it.

Online privacy cannot be abandoned, it is the stepping stone towards a future,
either future. The need of privacy for democracy hinders the abandonment (The circle, Dave E.). The apparent trade-off between privacy, safety and happiness can be overcome (1984, Orwell G.), leveraging the enabling factor of transparency to diminish concerns about safety. Privacy and transparency can be combined, enabling happiness and safety, as consequences. Government and Corporate cooperation with these measures in mind will transform the circumstance revolving around safety and privacy. (Bloomberg, 2018)

Online privacy cannot be abandoned, it is the stepping stone towards a future,
either future. The need of privacy for democracy hinders the abandonment.

Security Vs. Privacy, the trade-off in the modern world. The two should not be
regarded as mutually exclusive, but as symptoms of the circumstance of society.

The online realm legislation needs adaptation, and special cases, based on the
current legislation of the physical realm.

Human inconsistency leads to the sacrifice of privacy. Computer accuracy and
consistency will resolve issues. 

The control over data has to be given back to the creators, enabling democratic
information exchange.

Privacy is vital for humans, to an extent. People behave better when being
watched, though they shouldn't be watched all the time.

Transparency may be key in future politics and career management. Observations
will transform the labour market to be performance based instead of time based. 

International scandals like the Bloomberg reported china hardware hack hinder
the development and progression of privacy.
Further legislation is needed and transparent cooperation between firms and
government is essential.

Privacy online is something that millennials do not value as greatly as the older generations, since when the older generations were younger their privacy was something that was valued by their parents. It was a lot harder for parents to know exactly what their kids were doing other than just taking their word for it. Millennials and what they post online can easily be tracked by parents today if they were inclined to do so. Thus, privacy is something that needs to be abandoned for millennials since large corporations and their families can track most things that they are doing online.

----------------------------------------------------

Does privacy mean anonymity?

Does privacy not hide the reliable/responsible parties from prosecution?

Privacy leads to abnormal behaviour, which can imply much greater negative than
positive impacts.

Radicalization, polarisation, the alteration of facts, including fake news,
these are all existential threats to society and democracy, does privacy not
fuel these?

----------------------------------------------------

**Privacy is the ability to keep some things to yourself, regardless of their impact to society.**

**Anonymity is when you want people to see what you do, just not that it’s you doing it.**

Internet privacy involves the right or mandate of personal privacy concerning
the storing, repurposing, provision to third parties, and displaying of
information pertaining to oneself via the Internet.[1][2] Internet privacy is a
subset of data privacy. Privacy concerns have been articulated from the
beginnings of large-scale computer sharing.[3]

Privacy can entail either Personally Identifying Information (PII) or non-PII
information such as a site visitor's behavior on a website. PII refers to any
information that can be used to identify an individual. For example, age and
physical address alone could identify who an individual is without explicitly
disclosing their name, as these two factors are unique enough to identify a
specific person typically.

-----------------------------------------------------

## References

Bloomberg - Are you a robot?. (2018). Bloomberg.com. Retrieved 1 December 2018,
from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2018-10-04/the-big-hack-how-china
-used-a-tiny-chip-to-infiltrate-america-s-top-companies

Eggers, D. (2018). The Circle: A Novel. CORE Scholar. Retrieved 3 December 2018,
from https://corescholar.libraries.wright.edu/dlpp_all/131/

Dean, M. and Orwell, G. (2003). 1984. Harlow: Pearson Education.

DeCew, Judith Wagner. In Pursuit of Privacy: Law, Ethics, and the Rise of
Technology. Cornell University Press, 1997.
