---
layout: post
title: "Activity 5 PHL275"
date: 2018-11-11
authors: Ty_Yiu
categories: Uni PHL275
---

- How was the STUXnet virus developed and how did it find its target?
- Which one do you think was the most important part of the whole operation?
- Should operations like STUXnet be considered an act of war?
- Does regulation similar to the one about physical wars exist for cyberwarfare?
  If not, do you think that such a regulation is possible at international level?
  Why?
  How do the concepts of a policy vacuum and a conceptual muddle apply to this?
- Some of the people talking at the documentary support that cyberwarfare is bigger 
  and more important than nuclear weapons. Do you agree? Explain your answer.

Your answers should be short. You should use the documentary as a starting point
and you should also express your own views.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Though no specific individual or entity has been identified regarding the
development of STUXnet, it could be assumed to have been solely possible
following national involvement (e.g. U.S. intelligence agencies). The Stuxnet
virus was targeting uranium enrichment facilities following the schema of
frequency converters being arranged in eight arrays and having 168 centrifuges 
in each array. Therefore, it's target was indeed very specific. Siemens PLC's
and Windows systems were actual targeted devices. 

The most important part of the operation STUXNET is probably the very specific
and quiet execution. Its source code was on new levels of sophistication, and
its specific targeting made it hard to reverse engineer the program's intention.
Being so specific and not generating *noise*, made it hard to identify, and
trying to proactively look out for such specific applications may be useful but
unfeasible.

An act of war may be defined as the intentional action of one entity to provoke
a war with another entity. These entities may be nations. Actions of war
provocation may be defined by the country being affected, which makes the topic
subjective. A consensus principle may be used for concluding whether an action
is intentionally provocative and thus an act of war. STUXNET is thus, under
these considerations, not an act of war. The reason being, that there is no
identifiable/responsibility taking party behind STUXNET. An action by an
undefined or ambiguous party can not be provoking, nor can't it be.  

Regulation is different from having a common understanding. A regulation
involves a regulatory party, which is centralised, thus undermine-able. A common
understanding is decentralised and evolves with change. Cyberwarfare is a
serious cause of international incidents/conflicts and have to be treated
similarly to physical warfare. The most clear line can be drawn at the point, at
which cyberwarfare affects the physical world. The physical world is, as is the
cyber-realm, influenced by the other, thus cyber actions always have an effect
on the physical world, the extent at which one considers significantly affecting
the physical world, is what should be open for consensus.

Cyber warfare being bigger or more important than nuclear weapons, is an
absolute statement without context. Cyber warfare as well as nuclear warfare can
be on a scale of devastation. The reasons for any thread seeming more
devastating than another is the context. A nuclear weapon is only so fear
infusing, because so many people die within a short period of time, as well as
the destruction of land masses etc. Compare that with a School-shooting, which
involves many less deaths, but reveals a darker intention, making the
circumstance relatively worse. A plane crash seems more dramatic than a car
crash, even though many more people die every year due to car crashes, than
plane crashes. Fact is, that the measure of importance is subjective. My
personal opinion is, that cyberwarfare has the potential to affect more areas
than nuclear warfare, meaning a hack can steer an ICBM into New York, but it
could also crash wall street, resulting in different nature, similar extent of
chaos/destruction.
