---
layout: post
title:  "Activity Two (PHL275)"
date:   2018-10-07
authors: Ty_Yiu
categories: PHL275 Uni 
---
The Privacy protection for ordinary users on google search should be tackled from a supplier side instead of a consumer side. 

The sale of data should in any case be disregarded, but what about the reading/writing of your data?
Cookies are used in websites or apps as means of providing a better, more personalised / tailored experience. 
In itself, this intention is great.

Most apps ask you for permission for your data, but some is also collected without permission.
The question is, at what point one starts to ask for permission, as e.g. time taken on a website is equal to measuring the time a customer spends in a store. 

The use of data for a better experience doesnt entail the storage or profiling of users.
Thus, the privacy invasion would only occur after passing the provision of better experiences. 

The suppliers, the tech giants should be doing a better job at storing data on the users device and take similar measures. 
Apple does that quite well compared to Google, as they store sensitive data encrypted on the user phone instead of the apple servers (depending on the service).

Data should more be seen as means for optimisation. The intention is a big factor for being decisive about privacy issues.

Ultimately, all apps that permanently store data or create a profile should ask for permission of any recorded data to achieve such. All data used for optimising services, could also be requested from local storage of connected devices instead of being stored on servers, that would bring the ownership of data back to the user.  

I dont think regulation should be the choice to protect privacy, but a free market situation with tech companies that instead of using our data for profit, use our data for ourselves good.

