# **Basic Income**

> Medium. (2017). *Universal Basic Income: The Maslow Argument – Basic income – Medium*. [online] Available at: https://medium.com/basic-income/universal-basic-income-the-maslow-argument-d1346fa9a9f2 [Accessed 10 Feb. 2018]. — main reference

Recently, I discovered the above article talking about basic income and how it could profoundly affect societies positively by enabling people self-actualisation. In fact, here is not much to argue with, as the view portrayed within the article, mirrors the mine. What rather is going to be put focus on, is the, how it seems, common perception of basic income and how it should be perceived instead. 

### **A real-life example of a common perception of basic income**

In germany a bill states that a citizen eligible for the "Hartz IV" will receive 400 Euros from the government and will additionally be given any ammenities classified as "standard" lifestyle for an average German. Naturally, considering germany as one of the most Central European countries and henceforth an economic powerhouse, the relative standard lifestyle would clearly differ in perspection compared to e.g. Spain; that much for the scope of ammenities in question is (including free TV). The germans as a culture are quite different, but what stays consistent throughout germany is the mentality surrounding work-ethics. Hence, seeing people getting paid without working, they feel offended - and they have a right to be. Simply, because basic income solves the underlying problem of all welfare systems implemented nowadays, equality. If you get a piece of the cake, nethertheless how much cake you had taken before, that's great. In germany the perception of welfare accepting people is very negative and those living that lifestyle are considered "lazy" etc. 

### **A critique on society, based on the article** 

People nowadays are not the same as they were two hundred years ago, everything around us changed. Industrialisation and the information age enable humanity to change their focus of work, enthusiasm, time into, from physical labour to mental ingenuity. From farming and hunting to programming, calculating, designing. The human and the work he does is changing and will change further, which is why our perception of work needs to change. Traditionally, to ensure survival, but nowadays to afford wants, the work-system is old and outdated. For a **"based-on-basic-income-society"**, societies need to change from work as primitively expanding the survival capabilities of ones society, as already ensured, but rather on contributing to society as a whole by leveraging natural talents etc. —By doing so, most efficient and optimal output is reached in the most literal sense, as one would pursue what one would want to and can best pursue. 

### **Pre-Requisites for the implementation of basic income in society and the labour force**

The society we live in changed drastically historically, in terms of the interactions between individuals or groups and the relationships created. With the rise of the *industrialisation and globalisation* seen in the 20th century, the labour-force and what the labour force is supposed to do changed its nature completely. E.G: the implementation of machines that perform repetitive tasks obviously replaces labour. BUT, let me be clear, that machines take our jobs is a fact, not specifying to what extend. That machines take repetitive, rather primitive tasks is not bad in the long term. The main argument behind implementing machines is it to enable people to focus their work on what machines cannot do so far, creative work, design work etc. Furthermore, there is an evolution of work, from manual, primitive labour to intellectual, theoretical labour. 

Basic Income will enable the transition to ease. When people perform intellectual labour things change, such as the parameters the determine the amount of income one receives. Basic income will raise the income level absolutely, but in combination with intellectual labour, basic income will directly support the in the article stated main argument for basic income and its effects, self-fullfillment, considering both are in nature working towards intellectualisation and self-fullfillment as an advance to their intellectual work. 

### **Conclusion**

*Basic Income* is an interesting concept, sure enough,  bu not being integrated into any society soon enough. As the first stages of "**Maslow´s Argument**" are still not satisfied for everyone within a society, it will be limited, in a figurative and literal sense. The most-optimal and best version of itself can only be performed, while its constituent components are performing at maximum, which is assured with **"self-actualisation"** after proceeding from *Maslow´s Argument*. Basic income supports the transition towards a self-actualised more intellectualised society.