[TOC]

# Principles of Finance

## Terms

Primary market, Secondary market, securities (bonds, stocks), Capital gain, OTC market, Market capitalisation,  BBA (British banker association), 

## 25.January.18

### Why financial systems?

* Helps the flow of money 
* Payment
* Helps to connect
* Deficit unit
* Surplus unit
* Budgeting
* Valuation
* Investing
* Valuing businesses


* High liquidity investments correlated to time required

### Slide 25: 

Shows what both parties seek! (three boxes represent possible problems/opportunities) E.G. many investors (private equity) have many small amounts and can deliver big amounts to businesses/borrowers

* (Household) investors want to invest small amounts -> companies can offer shares to enable small amount investments

**Brokers:** intermediaries (i.e. finding and providing a mortgage)

**Risk transformation:** grouping small amounts of money into big chunks and investing it -> bigger profit, less risk

**Maturity transformation:** requirement of money -> liquidity of banks -> not everybody can withdraw everything! -> people can´t withdraw endless amounts without re-stocking.

**Volume transformation: **regulating amounts of money to be spend at a given point in time. ->risk regulation!

### Slide27: 

Information received from financial intermediaries highly limited -> lack of perfect information is driver of loss.

* Transaction costs: costs implied when making any transaction
* Problems decrease over time as economies of scale will act
* DN Capital -> financial system, bc it is abroker, asset transformer and market at once

## 30.January.18

***TEST on thusday 1.January.18***

Connecting the ultimate lenders with the ultimate borrowers is one of the key objectives of finance

### Financial Markets

* Primary Market — where securities (bonds, stocks) are issued
* Secondary Market — where securities (bonds, stocks) are traded
* Ability to liquidate a holding
* Reducing search, agreement and monitoring cost

Companies issue securities in exchange for money (liquidity) — that´s happening in the primary market. In the primary market, companies can issue securities to raise money for e.g. an Investment. **Liquidity** is key in finance. Securities are issued and the ultimate lenders exchange their savings (cash) for securities in the primary market. The problem faced, is what if the lenders want their money back for e.g. liquidity? —that´s where the secondary market comes in, allowing securities to be traded. A lender could go to a *secondary market* (like london exchange) in order to **liquidate their holding**!

### Debt and equity capital

Borrowing happens either by taking out loans or by issuing bonds. Interest is being treated as a tax-deductible expense.

**Debt** in this 

**Equity** is defined in finance as ones degree of ownership! Hence, directly correlated to **shares**, hence equity is a part owned of a company. When holding a share, returns come along in the form of dividends and capital gains. To investors, shares are offered as a higher return, hence making them more attractive to invest money/savings in, than debt. Debt does not pay back any interest, where shares do! On the other hand, shares are more risky than just lending the money to a company, but an interest/return can be expected on shares. Risk is correlated to return expected!— should it?

Bonds are often traded in an active secondary market.

Capital Gain, is a scenario, in which the capital assets of a company appreciate/rise, and hence the part of ownership of one is being worth more than it was before the capital gain happened. The gain is only realised as the asset is sold.

> When a company does not pay dividends, investors expect capital gain to be the form of return. 

### Exchange-trading and OTC markets

Exchange trading takes place on the myriad regulated share markets and other security exchanges. Hence, these places are identified as exchanges such as "NYSE" or "London stock exchange". These exchanges publish the prices of any security. *They are funded by a mixture of comission on trades, admission fees and annual charges for listings.* These annual fees are stakes of the companies that are listing their securities on the exchanges.

**Over-the-counter** (**OTC**) market, "*off-exchange market*", trade in securities between two parties on a private basis. The OTC market can put two parties like a household person and a broker in contact. The contact or the two parties can be in any relation (like friends). OTC Markets are **less transparent**! Published prices can though be seen on the internet for example. A part of OTC market securities are **pink sheets**, in general rather cheap securities, as they differ in annual fees and admission fees. Hence, OTC markets are more risky and the transparency of the prices traded is very low. Sidenote: most asset managers work with the OTC market.

**Market capitalisation** is the number of shares * the current price of the security. Market capitalisation can in turn be utilised to calculate a company´s value! (Total value/number of shares = price of shares) E.G: 18.5 million shares of "Facebook" are being traded every day (Avg. Volume). Still though, the Avg. Volume traded daily is significantly smaller than the overall size of shares available. Hence, buying 1% of Facebook is not possible, since Avg. Volume is much smaller!

### Bond Markets

Companies often need to borrow money. A bond can help realising that objective. Bonds are sold to investors and issued by governments or companies (in the UK calles gilts, in the US called treasury). They can be traded after issuance and must promise to be paid back. Bonds are tied to a time limit set before issuance. After the time limit expired, the capital sum must be paid with interest. Bonds can be governmental or corporate.

> Greece Benchmark Bond 10yr (DS) holds a red-yield and hence holds a lot of interest rate (%) per annum. —slide 3

Bond markets are relatively a lot more stable and less risky than share markets like FTSE100 or S&P 500! (Compare slie 4&6)

### Equity Markets

Owners of the company can vote directors on or off the boards to try to appoint a team. Limited liability for companies must be required. Limited liability ensures that lenders do not have to pay more than they have orignially lended the company, in case the company´s debt is larger than assets to be liquidate / cover their debts. On the other hand, **unlimited liability** also exists. 

### Money Markets

*The market where such entities like banks, large corporations, governments issue and buy short-term borrowing/debt.* The **wholesale** market is an example of how a short-term debt could be arranged. Short-term is defined as being timely-less than one year. In the money markets, banks are particularly active and the biggest player besides large corporations, that can also lend money or the largest borrowers, governments.

### Foreign exchange Markets

(Include ECON stuff)

The FOREX market is all about the exchange of currencies. A day-to-day example could simply be "Travel".

### Three Twins Ice Cream

**Best sources of funding?**

- Loans from Bank unlikely, as stated in the case study.
- 2 million USD required
- 7-8$ per pint -> 5$ per pint
- Increase of production from 50000 to 2 million pints
  1. VC´s
  2. Angel investors/investment banks
  3. Long-term instalment payments e.g. Banks/financial institutions
  4. Leasing of equipment / mortgages
  5. SBIC´s/NMVC -> sale of stock?
  6. Friends/family -> not 2 million USD

VC´s Are super-category of angel investors (experts in specific area. Besides providing money, they provide expertise/knowledge/experience).

## 1.Februar.18

*Sessions 3,4&5 PPT*

### Banking

**Core Banking VS. Corporate Banking**

**Universal banking -> commercial banking -> retail banking( -> Core banking) && wholesale banking (-> Corporate banking)**

Most Banks do operate as a mixture of retail and wholesale banking. Serving households should be different than serving corporates, thats why two "lanes" are available as a path of banking to pursue. 

**Cash management** refers to the allocation of accumulation and usage of cash deposited. Obviously holding cash does not generate any return, hence cash management is referring to what that cash should be used for, in order to generate a return. This perspective can be optional, meaning we can use the term from a banks perspective or a household. (Instead of depositing money, investing it)

**Syndicated Leading** is referring to a process in which multiple entities e.g. corporate banks accumulate a certain value and lend is as a bigger chunk instead of its constituent components respectively. (Like crowdfunding for big borrowings

*Other services* (Slide 5) can be referring to core banking or corporate banking. Both banking natures implement similar processes for mentioned services. One element its e.g. **factoring**, which describes selling receivables for a lower factor (discount) to other parties. (When in financial troubles, e.g. low liquidity) Hence, for these reasons, factoring is seen as a *last resort* solution.

> **Factoring** is a financial transaction and a type of debtor finance in which a business sells its **accounts receivable** (i.e., invoices) to a third party (called a factor) at a discount. A business will sometimes factor its **receivable** assets to meet its present and immediate cash needs. — En.wikipedia.org. (2018). *Factoring (finance)*. [online] Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factoring_(finance) [Accessed 1 Feb. 2018].

**Hire purchase**

> a system by which one pays for a thing in regular instalments while having the use of it.

### Investment Banking

*(Slide 6)*

Investment Banking are of *corporate and government assistance* and performs using *a form of market activity*. E.G. raising one million by issuing shares and selling those is hard as a sole party. Investment banks buy whatever remains from a share issuance and can sell the surplus on the secondary markets naturally. Market operations are a vital part of investment banks, trading their own money for bonds, stocks, derivatives, futures etc. 

**Hedgefunds**

Prime brokerage for hedge funds is another market activity investment banks utilise. Hedge funds aim to be diversified in terms of how much money is allocated at one point, but rather specific, e.g. industry-specific.

### Core Banking

### Deposits

**Current accounts** (or sight deposits) are the biggest proportion of assets a core bank handles, normally ranging between ten and forty percent of overall assets. A core bank also offers **Time deposits** (or savings account), which mainly differs from a current account in not enabling the user to withdraw money before a *time period* expires. Withdrawing is harder with a savings account, but they offer interest paid as a return on your deposits, where *current accounts* do not. **Money market borrowing** is another proportion of assets. This term is referring to inter-banking or **repurchase agreements (repos)** and describes how banks interact with each other. The least proportionate asset category is **bank capital**. Bank capital is talking about the net-worth or a banks value to investors. (Expand definition of bank capital)

### Lending

Lending money from banks is possible by e.g. getting a credit. A **credit** can be obtained from a **credit card**, which enables you differently to lend money with a certain interest to pay back, depending on your **credit score**. The better the credit score you have at a bank, the more likely that you will be allowed to get a certain amount as a credit with a certain interest rate. Naturally, a bank lends money to those most capable of re-paying the money borrowed. **Lending** techniques include the screening and monitoring of borrowers to reduce risk. **Banks** would diversify across a range of borrowers as well to reduce risk. Loans to Individuals and corporations typically account for 50 - 70% of a commercial banks assets. 10 - 35% might be lent out to other banks and Institutions in the financial markets on a short-term basis. Less than 20% of assets are e.g. long-term government bonds, shares etc. The smallest, less than 10%, is accounted for as buildings, equipment, software and other assets. Other than that, banks still have their liquid reserves. 

## 6.February.18

### Household lending

Consumer loans (personal loans) are unsecured.

**Secure VS Unsecure**

**Unsecured** lending would be: **credit card (2-3% per month), overdraft (2-3% per month)**

**Secured** lending would be: **mortgage (2-3% or less per annum), auto loans (6-8% per annum)**

If the loan is not paid back, the bank will seize collateral and court will declare one bankrupt, excluding one from any ability to borrow money for five years.

**Payday lenders** give loans to small entities for short periods of time, attached to a high interest rate (0.8% per day). The high percentage in interest rate, makes this choice of borrowing money less logical, in fact, the credit card has a smaller interest than a payday lender.

Credit scores are utilised as well for household lending, to calculate a credit score, there are parameters shown in the reference provided.

> https://mycourses.hult.edu/courses/2243436/files/122162587?module_item_id=36103901 —reference

### Corporate lending (lending to businesses)

**Banks** make it attractive for companies to borrow by having low costs for legal and administrative aspects, their operation speed, flexibility and availability to offer loans to not only big firms, but also small firms.

Business lending includes an **arrangement fee**, which is paid besides everything else, as an on-top commission, taken by the bank. The **interest rate** can be either **fixed or floating**. The **Base rate or LIBOR (London interbank offer rate)** is a term of agreement based upon a base rate called LIBOR. The arrangement will normally include a LIBOR plus a certain percentage on-top. The  **BBA (British banker association)**  would publish the **LIBOR** every day and is seen as a benchmark to aim for. Most trustworthy and respective customers will receive the base rate only.

**Types of Lending:**

* Personal overdraft
* Term Loans
* Loan covenants
* Flexible loan
* Personal loan
* Graduate loan
* mortgage
* Start-up loan
* Business loans
* Credit card loans
* Business overdraft

Debt consolidation accumulates constituent debts there are into one. One debt to rule them all!