[TOC]

# Principles of Management

### Terms:

Change Management (reacting/pro-acting in case of events), Managerial decision-making, The Company Democracy model, Shared Value Economy, Team-building-model, total-quality-management, managing-functions (the process of management), SME (small-medium-enterprise)

## 25.January.18

E.G: Engineering solves a problem -> is the solution applicable/usable (faulty/correct for given situation) 
Managing the engineers that solve a specific problem != solving the problem. The machine might be good/working for its purpose, but what's it intended/actually used for might not be the same. The main problem lies within managing people instead of resources. 

> Managing resources != Managing people — Emotional quotient required

There´s a strong emphasis on Teams. especially the characteristics, processes involved, conflict resolution and how teams actually interact/do team-work. Remember, that a team is defined as a group of people having a common objective.

***Managerial decision-making*** includes differentiation between decision-making models, including: rational, practical, political. Also decisions and problems fall into categories and hence need identification of type. Managerial decision-making utilises frameworks and processes, which need analysis. Finally, the decision-making-process touches on making innovative and effective decisions is dependent on group context.

When considering Earl Nightingale, the goal-setting process is vital, especially in group context.

### What do managers do? 

1. Set Objectives —Establish goals and decide what must be done
2. Organise —Divide workload
3. Motivate&Communicate —Create teamwork via decisionista on pay, promotions etc. (Requires communication)
4. Measure — appraise performance, set targets and standards
5. Develop People —Recognise value of employees and develop on this base thought

Goals should be set lower than maximum performance levels to sustain success. Too many variables go into change and events may be un-analysable. Bad and unpredictable events happen, sometimes logic seems to stop and hence there should be a reasonable difference between actual performance levels and maximum performance levels. E.G: a football team wins locally and tries to win in the world cup (which obviously works very unlikely). The *goal* set should be explicit and definite to make missing that goal less possible and not pivvot without intending to. 

> What are you capable of? —What do you do with whatever you're capable of doing.

Employees and people in general tend to not sustain performance levels. The goals set by managers should appraise performance. By doing so, goals seem more achievable and subconsciously motivation will surge, as a goal becomes more attainable. *Capability is subjective*! People tend to not show all their capailities, hence they need to be discovered. 

###Capability VS. Capacity

> Capability != Capacity —Capability is the possibility to solve a problem. Capacity is the capability to maintain capability over a period of time or under certain circumstances.
>
> Capability -> capacity -> mastery

People are not stupid, but still do stupid things —Why? Intellectual capabilities can be raised, capacity will be increased and eventually the intellectual capability becomes mastery (*important* to notice, is that a base intelligence exists, affecting natural talents of People). People may be capable to board a plane and fly to India, but people may as well oppose, as their willingness decreases (family back home etc.). Willingness is closely tight to capacity, but not capability, as people could be forced to e.g. board a plane to India. **The capability of people must be considered mainly when "organising", but also in "set objectives" and "Motivate & Communicate".** Work done should be valued and especially needs to be taken into consideration within "Motivate & Communicate". Willingness, in better words capacity should be considered when valuing work (One who comes in over the weekend, but works same hours as another, should be valued more, as his peers might be pressure to not work on the weekends -> people don´t like working when its no-work-time, hence rewards should be in place).

###Measurement

Without measurement, change cannot be observed. When measuring something, what is its change dependent on? "Tell me the solution and I´ll tell you the problem"—a solution cannot be measured. A school grade is dependent on multiple parameters, that have to be considered to come to a solution. Therefore, measurement (observation of change) needs its underlying parameters to be discovered and considered. 

### Developing People

Employees, people are resources to a company, developing their skills and themselves is an investment and can backfire. (E.G: Employees changing job) Skills developed should be varying, to ensure diversity within the companies competences (Intro to the business environment). The training received by employees might not be used all the time, but save the success of the project, when required. The value of having the required skills for a project is immense, considering that parameter is involved in the **"Set Objectives"** process. Furthermore, by expanding competences, more possible future projects are now attainable. According to the goals set or aspired to set, should be inidicator for what to develop in people. Development should persist and sustain throughoutly.

**Average employment time** for e.g. Mackenzie is approximately two years. Obviously companies that hold their employees longer than let´s say six years, is very positively running. —What are they doing differently? People work for money, the money they receive is directly correlated to the skills required/capacity of the individual. Hence, by developing ones capacities, their income/main objective becomes more yield holding.

## 1.February.18

###The process of Management

#### The four management functions

> https://files.transtutors.com/book/cmsimg/22779_the%20management%20process.jpg —Illustration

E.G. "the client is always right" -> given that profit is made ->statements are subject of contingence. 

Relationship of conceptual, human and technical skills to management seem to be human-oriented, instead of technically-oriented in terms of skills and managers/non-managers. The relationship between being a good manager and just a manager depends on a severe number of factors, but google formulated eight good behaviours for managers. E.G. micromanagement is perceived as not particular positive in nature, hence it should not be done. Simplest reason being the trade-off between time/energy/effort and result/return. 

#### Manager Types

Management levels in the organisational hierarchy are divided into four layers, three of them articulated as "levels of management". These are simply sub-divided into "Top", "Middle" and "First-Line" Managers. Besides vertical hierarchy, people at the three levels may also have horizontal project manager responsibility, in contrast to solely vertical hierarchy adjusted responsibility. To remember, is the fact, that the structure and topology of a company is highly dynamic and rather complex. Henceforth, the variables to account for when back-propagating decisions and results, are too many to ever reach certainty, which is why responsibility should be multi-dimensional and reminds of the negligibility of singular entities.

**Making the leap from individual performer to manager** goes along with a change of identity. Characteristics like "specialist" are now "generalist", more diverse tasks are solved, and coordination is surpassing performance of work.

### Management perspectives over time

> http://slideplayer.com/5271168/17/images/3/2.1+Management+Perspectives+over+Time.jpg —Illustration
>
> https://image.slidesharecdn.com/ch02daftnemaise-090926134818-phpapp02/95/the-evolution-of-management-thinking-7-728.jpg?cb=1253972945 —illustration

Perspectives/approaches to management and how it should be conducted, changed over the course of time. The classical perspective underwent many iterations before reaching modern concepts like "**The Technology driven workspace**" or "**Open (Collaborative) Innovation**". An action can affect other entities and hence have to be considered. This concept is represented by **systems thinking/ systemic management.** Most perspectives over time are rather easy to comprehend, given their naturally understandable names.

#### Systems thinking/systemic management and circles of causality

> https://image.slidesharecdn.com/chap1-8-151102124627-lva1-app6892/95/the-leadership-experience-74-638.jpg?cb=1446468645 —illustration 

An example of the Illustration above in action, would be the Increase of advertisement, that might increase sales and decrease profits! The Illustration shows how a decision may affect other states of the firm. Hence, **systemic thinking** can also be described as the way of thinking, incorporating causalities of actions on other states and how these states may be affected. Furthermore, the concept of realising action-reaction and causality flowcharts enables managers to seek alternative ways of operating or utilising a different action, that may not have e.g. a negative effect on many states, but a few. (Easy: a -> b; where a is action and b reaction. If b = bad outcome, then a -> c, where c is a better outcome.)

#### Characteristics of Weberian bureaucracy

> http://slideplayer.com/5271168/17/images/8/2.3+Characteristics+of+Weberian+Bureaucracy.jpg —illustration

Max Weber argues, that bureaucracy can be good, where there is no other way to maintain control. Weberian bureaucracy is trying to conceptualise the **ideal bureaucracy**. It is argued, that sometimes bureaucracy can be good and is necessary. The framework for a perfect bureaucracy is dependent on how bureaucracy is defined.

Bureaucracy should be opposed when comparing to democracy or aristocracy. The underlying thought is Socrates´ arguing, that skilled people should utilise and apply their skills/natural talents/knowledge. Here Socrates argues that a leader/manager should be skilled and trained to be so, enhancing chances of success. 

#### The humanistic perspective

When applied to management, it emphasises the importance of relating and understanding human behaviour, needs and attitudes. It incorporates the study of human behaviour and anthropology respectively, trying to show why people behave in certain ways and how those behaviours are being triggered.

#### The X Y theory

> https://laetitiastuder.files.wordpress.com/2014/11/xy.png —illustration 

There are two schools of management, that describe the process of how entities should be treated/commanded/lead. The **X Y theory** opposes two views, in which one is authoritarian, repressive and tightly controlled, where as the other view implements liberal and empowering behaviouristics.

**The behavioural science management approach** is based upon scientific methods and draws from sociology, psychology, anthropology, economics etc. to develop human behaviour theories for interactions between people and institutions.

#### The Contingency view of management

> https://image2.slideserve.com/3793950/contingency-view-of-management-n.jpg —illustration
>
> The illustration, when unwrapped seems to work like time-lines and behaves like time travel allowing changing the past and creating alternative timelines.

This view of management tries to create leverage out of certain situations, depending what's good for the organisation, considering that ones good may be another ones bad-luck, despite realising, that there is no ultimate choice, but only trade-offs.

#### The total quality management (TQM)

> https://d2myx53yhj7u4b.cloudfront.net/sites/default/files/styles/full_width_desktop/public/IC-TQM-Principles.jpg?itok=ZKO8t4f1 —illustration 

This framework tries to maximise customer satisfaction. There are multiple distinct understandings to this theory, the *German (create best product and people either want to buy it or not)*, *American(create something that works just fine, but leave it like that or add-on later)* and the *Japanese (adapt to customer wants)*.