

[TOC]

#Principles of Marketing

## Terms

SLA (Service-level agreement), FMCG/CPG, 

## References

Marketingweek.com, Mark Ritson, 

##23rd.January.18 & 25th.January.18

* Syllabus included
* Product Price Place Promotion -> The four P´sof Marketing 
* The Market communications

###The Marketing Concept

* The achievement of corporate goals through meetingand exceeding customer needs and expectations better than the competition.

  ### Customer Orientation

  * Corporate activities are focused upon providing
    customer satisfaction

* **Integrated Effort**

  * All staff accept the responsibility for creatingcustomer satisfaction

*  **Goal achievement**

  * The belief that corporate goals can be achievedthrough customer satisfaction.

* **Topics ofConcepts**

  * B2C

* B2B

* NFP/NGO/Charities

### Market orientation

* Customer needs
* Potential market opportunities
* Marketing products and services
* Customers

### Marketdriven businesses

* Market focus VS. internal focus
  * Why should brands make customers feel respected?

    * To deliver self-identification relationship withcustomers and businesses. 
    * Received respect brightens one`s mood, hence positivesubconscious stimulation in said situations.
  * How does this apply to B2C and B2B?

    * Different methods to apply for communication.
    * Different audience and different endpoints
  * List three consumer brands and three businessbrands which truly make customers feel valued:

    * Apple, Porsche, Rolex
    * Bosch, Intel, Stihl, Hütter
  * Is it possible to make customers too happy?

## 30th.January.18

### An effective Marketing Mix

An effective marketing mix includes four aspects. The marketing mix should ***match customer needs (or wants)*** , should be ***well balanced***, should ***match corporate resources*** and should ***create a competitive advantage***. 

When talking about price, all parties, B2B, B2C, actually everyone should care about the price of a good/service. Price is vital when looking at Break-even, shutdown and operating cost. **Price Wars** show how every party must consider price on their ow, but also how analysis should be utilised for comparison.

> Google analytics is free, compared to similar services, that went bankrupt or were acquired due to Google winning a price war.

Promotion — the fourth P of Marketing, gives an indicator about ROI or ROMI (return on marketing investment, where Marketing can be promotion). Additionally to the four P´s of marketing, three can be added, making it **The seven P´s of Marketing**

* Price
* Place
* Product/service
* Promotion
* People
* Process
* Physical evidence

**Competitive advantage** can occur as e.g. by lower production costs. In nature, a competitive advantage will ensure operations, hence rounding up a well-created marketing mix.

**Customer needs** (Economic, performance, availability, reliability, durability, productivity, psychological, self-image, quiet-life, pleasure, convenience, risk-reduction) have to be listed and identified in a general way.-> **Key Customer requirements** should be identified in a given audience. <—> **Competitive advantage** should now be applied to exploit opportunities.

### The relationship between market orientation and profitability

**Commodity businesses** are displayed as a U-shaped diagram, where Profitability is on the y-axis and Market orientation (Low, medium, high) is categorised. The **Non-commodity business** on the other hand, is linear, as market orientation progresses.

### The Marketing environment

The actors and forces to operate correctly acting upon a business. A business is not within a vaccuum, but in an environment with multiple entities. In this environment, parties could be of any nature. **PESTEL** can be utilised! (**include BUS100 material**)

* **The Marketing environment** —The actors/forces affecting a company´s capability to operate effectively in providing products/services to customers
* **Macroenvironment**
* **Microenvironment**
  * Customers, Investors, Creditors and Journalists/Media -> e.g. of players affecting a company´s capability of operating.

### A classical Brand —Coca Cola

**FMCG** —fast moving consumer goods **OR** **CPG** —consumer packaged goods

**Analyse Coca Cola for following aspects:**

*Brand Values:* Diversity, Global, Unity —for everyone

*Global:* operates internationally —even connects people

*Brand Extensions:* Diet coke, cola life, cherry, vanilla …. a lot! Tries to offer a variation for everyone/different use cases.

*Future prospects:* Making zero-sugar & life edition bigger (as health-hype continues), basically expanding their portfolio to ensure diversity.

*Appropriate promotion:* yes, no negative-externalities except production! America playing world-cops.

> https://mycourses.hult.edu/courses/2243477/modules/items/35163056

### Discussion on Coca-cola, pop music and FIFA

**How is coca-cola using sponsorship?**

As a promotional tool for expanding reach of their brand´s influence, internationally

**Is it delivering value for them?**

"Wavin´Flag" was actually more associated with the FIFA as the official anthem of the World Cup. Though it should/could have been directly related to the Coca-cola company, where most people do not associate it this way.

**Do you believe Sports and Music are effective for sponsorships? For what brands?**

Obviously.

### Key performance indicators

**Key Performance indicators** (KPI´s) allow the observation and comparison of performance and can be used as a tool of analysis of a businesses absolute or relative performance. 

