---
layout: post
title: ""
date: 2019-03-28
categories: Uni MGT370
---

## Multiple Roles of HR as Change Architect

* Change Architect
    - Change Facilitator
    - Change Champion
    - Change Designer
    - Change Demonstrator

### HR as change agent
They provide *drive* *(for change)* for conducting change at every
organisational level, while giving change a structured framework. Change agents
do not only provide the drive, but can proactively engage. They should align
with top management and employees, making a *middle-ground*. Appropriate
organisational agility requirements need to be defined, meaning training &
developing the aspect of agility within the organisation. Furthermore, the
identification and establishment of *workable change management processes* is
given as such result. As stated above, the drive entails communication that will
aid in delivering successful change by creating influence within the
organisation. The question of when to communicate the drive is vital for
political employment of these techniques in favour of change.

### Necessary abilities for change agents
Would thus be the ability to diagnose and solve problems. This can only be
achieved by employing continuous observation/diagnosis, as the question of at
what point to interfere becomes ominous. Relationship maintenance with clients
and building these relationships is important. While doing so, the vision needs
to be properly articulated to enable a good/honest relation. As drivers of
change, an agenda is needed to articulate specific implementation plans to
achieve said change goals. As the communication and relations entail humanity,
there exists a certain level of ambiguity, due to the human factor. Ambiguity
can be employed to leave certain aspects planned out of the picture. Hence,
the ambiguity of driving change communication can imply conflict, which then
requires management by HR. To predict possible conflict, one can use a
*power-interest* matrix, identifying the impacted entities of planned change
implementation and thus potential areas of conflict. Employee evaluations
provide insight into the behaviouristics of them, thus they can be utilised for
predictions and even e.g. adjusting power-interest matrices. The application of
business, products and work processes aid in coordinating effective
communication and managing resistance and risk.

### HR role in change

- Planning
    - Evaluations 
    - (**IMPORT**)
    - Strategic forecasting of initiatives and direction
        - PESTEL, SWOT, Porter's five, Stakeholder anaylisis
    - Four trajectory of industry change analysis 
        - Intermediating, Radical, Creative & Progressive *(4 trajectories)*
        - Identifying changes in an industry, not a market this time.
        - Use five forces to identify influences the business within the
          industry has to deal with
        - Industry core assets/activities (what's it about), Are there any
          threats? Relevance after a given threat (Change in the industry?).
    
