## Individual Prerequisites for change to occur

Three sections, the *Head*, the *Heart* and the *Hands*, represent the thinking
and understanding perspective (Head), the emotional and motivational (Heart) and
Behavioural (Hands). Questions like *"Why should I change?"* or *"What's in it
for me?"* are questions that arise. Experience is the underlying principle, that
decides how people are going to behave, in a good as well as bad sense. Bad
perceived outcomes of change will be seen in experience and thus would lead to a
opposing view of the change. **Groupthink** describes an ignorance that emerges
from individual perceptions. One may be opposing a change to be made, that
person as part of a proposing group may adapt it's perception of the change to
be more positive. Thus, being honest, realistic and factual can hinder this kind
of ignorance by setting straight the facts. On a *international* scale, it
takes much longer to integrate change and common consensus can help accelerate
this process.

## Kurt Lewin's Model

His model is a simple framework for managing change known as *unfreeze, change
and refreeze*. Lewin explained organisational change using the analogy of
changing the *shape of a block of ice*. E.G. Unfreezing a large cube of ice to
change it and reform it into a cone of ice. The risks involved during the
unfreezing - refreezing process have to be considered. After having figured out
the change, how to make it happen? By recognising the three distinct stages of
change, one can plan to implement the changes required. Starting off with *the
motivation to change (unfreeze)* as it is necessary to change existing attitudes
towards working practices and prepare the ground. *Communication* about the
proposed change is vital, if people are to understand and support the to be made
changes. After effective communications and the empowering of people to embrace
new ways of working and learning new values, problems are identified and action
plans developed to enable implementation. Maximum flexibility is needed in the
planning and implementation of change. Emergent changes may arise, that will
contribute towards the greater objective, thus agility is needed as emergent
changes and unpredictabilities can interfere with implementation. The process
ends when the organisation returns to a *sense of stability (refreeze)* and the
benefits of the change are realised. *Praise, rewards* and other reinforcements
are required on an individual level and more effective performance at an
organisational level. Not until the change has become incorporated into the
culture can it be said to be *frozen*.

![Lewin's Framework for Change](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/77/e0/c6/77e0c67838d25261a6a4c83933dde932.png)

## Importance of Communication in Empowerement and Organisational Change

Have people internally have come to peace with the change?  Klein(1996)
provided evidence concerning the way communication process can help employees.
Feedback and adjustments have to paired with strategies that encourage
*disclosure* of problems. Discussion of solutions through intensive
*face-to-face communication* between management and employees, was helpful.
The  *Just-in-time* model can be used as a philosophical model to refocus on
urgent/priority matters and identifying what is working and what not. These
conversations can also become unnecessary when having them too often.

### Brain evolution: from emotional responses to cognition

Not being cavemen anymore, but civilised 21st century humans, our perception
changed, as well as how our brain works. A stimulus will trigger 100% in the
emotional part of the brain and not a rational brain region. Knowing that the
first reaction will always be emotional, we can now start constructing
frameworks and strategies to leverage this fact for change making. 

### How an abstract term can be perceived?

*Business transformation - Marger and acquisition:* Lay-offs (as a perceived
potential outcome) generate fear and activate *fight or flight*, where as
systems optimisation (as an outcome) generates participation and activates
positive decision making. Circumstances can be perceived differently and thus
opinions and perceptions of employees have to be considered as subjective. Is
what people are telling me actually what they want to tell me or is it an
emotional reaction? Emotional matters are often polarised and thus create
extreme views of emotional projections of the change. Having employees know what
the plan is, how to implement it et cetera, is vital for them not to solely
react emotionally but have a rational stance on the circumstance.

#### Following the way the brain makes its own stories

1. Motivation / Why
    - Intrinsic motivation
2. Understanding / What
    - Focus on the process of change
3. Building the thinking patterns
    - Individual ownership

First the intrinsic motivation has to be communicated, why a change has to be
made. Communicating what needs to be changed is the second step, to start
rational thinking processes known as building the thinking patterns. Emotions
fog your vision and rational thinking using strategy and logic makes you see
clear, spot potential discrepancies or problems.



