**Description of Assignment: Target length: 2,500 words**

## Task:

‘Find a multinational organisation of your choice and describe and evaluate
specific changes that they went through.  Why was the change triggered, how was
it managed and was it successful or not.  Whilst you are performing this
analysis, please use appropriate theories, models and relevant examples.’

## Requirements

This 2,500 words assignment is to be typed in a report format.  You are only
allowed 10% more or 10% of the expected word count.  

*Expected Format of the Report:*

### Executive Summary:

A summary including information on what this report has achieved in doing.

### Table of Contents:

Each section included in the report should be listed and given its own
numbering, which is in turn reflected in the report itself.

### Introduction:

**In this section I would expect the best students to:** Discuss what we mean by
change management.  Consider why an understanding of change management is highly
important.  Explain any relevant theories/models in relation to the wider topic
of change management.  Signpost the structure of the document, including a brief
overview of the company they have chosen.

### Main Body:

In this section I would expect students to discuss the changes that the
organisation they have chosen had to deal with.  A clear analysis should be
provided in relation to what was the change, what was the impact it had on the
organisation and how did they deal with it. 

The main purpose for performing this secondary research is to allow students to
practically see the effect that changes can have on business organisations. That
way they can understand that such changes can be positive or negative, direct or
indirect.  It is crucial for students to show case the risks of having to deal
with change and the power/influence of relevant stakeholders to each case
scenario.

### Conclusions:

This section should summarise the main points of the previous section, drawing
everything together.

### Recommendations:

Any recommendations might take the form of advice to managers attempting to
understand the business environment.

### List of References:

References need to be provided in an alphabetical order.

You must do your own work and avoid plagiarising at all cost. Plagiarism is a
serious academic crime and all plagiarized work will be awarded a zero mark.
Please ensure that every part you have read from a book or an official website,
and intend to use in your essay, is paraphrased and in text references provided
accurately using Harvard Referencing System.

## Apple and their migration from being a producer to service provider

The smartphone market has seen incredible growth in its beginnings, everybody
had to get one, but as the marginal benefit from *upgrading* a phone declined,
due to a lack of innovation and technological limitations, so did the sales. The
accessibility of technology allowed many new entries into the market and the
oligopolic smartphone market has become one of monopolistic competition and 
finally more homogenous in terms of the product.

Apple, as a smartphone selling company, has experienced mentioned changes in the
smartphone market environemnt first hand, was influenced by them and based
changes to be made that concern the internal company, on such *macro* trends.

On the other hand, the many smartphone manufacturers that have been enjoying
near monopolistic competition for many years, are seeing themselves in troubling
situations. This trend has been going on for a long time, but just becoming very
clear as the technological limitations were eliminated. E.g. Nokia

Apple has been one of the most dominant smartphone manufacturers since 2008 and
has gained a significant market share as well as customer base/loyalty. Their
decline in sales though, is not to be hindered as well. 

In recent times, the chinese market has been an area which is especially hard
for apple to be adequately present in. Let it be because of *trade-wars* or any
other reason, fact is that sales are declining and not only in china.

Computers and electronics have been shrunken down since their invention and so
have smartphones. The *"new on the horizon"* technology, such as wearable tech
will replace today's smartphones, and apple may or may not be getting on that
*new big thing*. Nevertheless if they will, a bigger question arises considering
apple is mainly a smartphone manufacturer.

The question that arises is what apple is going to do about above mentioned
decline in smartphone sales and the answer is, that they've already done well
enough of product diversification, that they can possibly sustain without any
smartphone sales.


